[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Intel.
[Amit Varma]: Two roads diverged in a wood and you, you took the one you're passing through.
[Amit Varma]: Why do we take the paths we take in our lives?
[Amit Varma]: For some of us, it's social convention and inertia.
[Amit Varma]: When I was growing up in the 1980s, good middle class boys were supposed to be engineers and doctors.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe do that newfangled thing an MBA, certainly try for UPSC.
[Amit Varma]: Why not just go along?
[Amit Varma]: Some of us manage to ignore these conventions and find that golden intersection between doing something we love,
[Amit Varma]: something we are good at and something we can get paid for.
[Amit Varma]: But whatever choice we make, there's usually some rationale behind it.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe a steady career, maybe a pot of gold if we get to the end of the rainbow,
[Amit Varma]: maybe an artistic satisfaction that can't be measured only in banknotes.
[Amit Varma]: But some people, they go against the tide and make choices that seem destined not to work.
[Amit Varma]: Your enemies laugh at you, your friends feel sorry for you.
[Amit Varma]: But you gotta do what you gotta do.
[Amit Varma]: As a great Kashi Nath Singh wrote in Kashi Ka Assi,
[Amit Varma]: Bhaar mein jaye duniya, hum bajaye harmoniya.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Let the world go to hell, I will play my harmonium.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Abhinandan Sekri, the founder and CEO of News Laundry.
[Amit Varma]: Abhinandan joined the news industry as a journalist with NewsTrack,
[Amit Varma]: a video news magazine that circulated by videocassette long before the internet existed.
[Amit Varma]: His career took many unconventional routes after that.
[Amit Varma]: He was an assistant director on Meera Nair's film, Monsoon Wedding.
[Amit Varma]: He jumped into making travel shows for television when there was no market for travel shows on television.
[Amit Varma]: He started an NGO with Arvind Kejriwal and Manish Sisodia, among others,
[Amit Varma]: at a time when they were all unknown and such activism seemed doomed to failure.
[Amit Varma]: He wrote comedy for television while the world went to hell around him.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, he formed News Laundry, a media house with a difference.
[Amit Varma]: They would ignore advertisers and subsist directly of the goodwill of their readers.
[Amit Varma]: Today, everyone is talking about this as a new trend in the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: Abhinandan and his team have been doing this for a decade.
[Amit Varma]: When I invited him on the show and he agreed, I didn't have to do much digging about what kind of person he is.
[Amit Varma]: One thing I love about Abhinandan is that what you see is what you get.
[Amit Varma]: His public persona has no filters. I love that about him.
[Amit Varma]: Before recording this episode, we were chatting about Aakar Patel's delightful tweets
[Amit Varma]: and I pointed out that Aakar has become a personification of the phrase, no more fucks to give.
[Amit Varma]: Aakar is fearless in a way that most of us can only admire from a distance.
[Amit Varma]: I felt Abhinandan had reached that state as well.
[Amit Varma]: But he told me, nope, he still has some way to go.
[Amit Varma]: Be that as it may, he is a fearless crusader for a better India.
[Amit Varma]: And in times when the rest of the media seems to have sold itself out,
[Amit Varma]: News Laundry continues to speak truth to power.
[Amit Varma]: Many of us admire this, but we should also put our money where our mouth is.
[Amit Varma]: If you agree, head on over to newslaundry.com slash subscription and support News Laundry.
[Amit Varma]: You can even get a 25% discount if you write to Abhinandan at an email ID he reveals at the end of the show.
[Amit Varma]: But I would say, ignore the discount, pay the full price. Pay to keep news free.
[Amit Varma]: Now if that sounds like a commercial, it isn't. The commercial comes now.
[Amit Varma]: How secure are we?
[Amit Varma]: In general, we are not as secure as we think.
[Amit Varma]: We rely on the state for the rule of law, but across the world, states tend to be predators rather than protectors.
[Amit Varma]: We do get some security that comes from social trust and conventions, but that can work both ways.
[Amit Varma]: One place where we are relatively secure though is the internet.
[Amit Varma]: I often speak of technology with hope, as it empowers individuals and it also protects them.
[Amit Varma]: And it does it so well and in such an unseen way that we often take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: There is no better example of this than the sponsor of this episode, Intel.
[Amit Varma]: Devices powered by Intel help businesses stay connected and secure and provide them performance and stability.
[Amit Varma]: Intel's 11th Gen vPro platform has layers of security that go beyond software,
[Amit Varma]: with advanced threat detection and comprehensive multi-level security features.
[Amit Varma]: No one will mess with you if you have Intel by your side.
[Amit Varma]: The Intel vPro platform, built for business, wherever business happens.
[Amit Varma]: Abhinandan, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. Pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So it's interesting, you know, I realized while looking up your bare biographical details that we are the same age.
[Amit Varma]: You're both 47, though I'll get to 48 before you, so I'll be a step ahead.
[Amit Varma]: And although we have sort of had orthogonal careers in the media, in journalism and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: I actually don't know much about you and I'm not even sure how much we really have in common,
[Amit Varma]: even though we've almost had, you know, parallel lives in Delhi and Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: I was in Delhi for a very brief while.
[Amit Varma]: I was in Bombay for a very brief while.
[Amit Varma]: There you go, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I've also worked in television and I've also been a journalist and we both do podcasts, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to know a little bit more about the non-public persona.
[Amit Varma]: Like if somebody searches for your name, you're all over.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the delightful things that I kind of like about everything I've seen of yours and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: is that what you see is what you get, you know, you're just putting yourself out there.
[Amit Varma]: So one gets a sense that there is a public persona of Abhinandan Sekri and hey, everybody knows that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure a lot of people must have told you that they feel a sense of familiarity with you when they meet you
[Amit Varma]: because they're so used to watching you.
[Amit Varma]: But take me before that, like, you know, where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What was your childhood like?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of a boy were you?
[Guest]: Well, I've been through, let's say, two distinct phases as a boy.
[Guest]: I had a very idyllic small town childhood.
[Guest]: You know, Malguri days of the North, kind of.
[Guest]: Dehradun was a small town, small town where everybody walked.
[Guest]: The only time your car came out was if you're going to the club, you know, one of those evenings.
[Guest]: My dad was a fauji, my mother was a school teacher.
[Guest]: And Dehradun was a town for retired people and faujis and teachers and schools.
[Guest]: And I'm talking like the 70s and 80s.
[Guest]: So there weren't as many schools as there are now.
[Guest]: Like, there was like, there were no red lights in Dehradun till like, even the late 90s.
[Guest]: It's just after Uttarakhand was made and became a capital, it became anything.
[Guest]: So, and when dad was in the army, you know, before he took premature retirement,
[Guest]: because mum was a teacher in Vellum Girls School, we were allowed to be educated at the Doon School.
[Guest]: So it was like a quota, kind of.
[Guest]: So especially when many people who are, who like me, have got the benefit of quota,
[Guest]: I don't realize we are quota kids.
[Guest]: And when they grow up and they're doing really well, they say, bloody, what is this quota?
[Guest]: I was like, can I use F words here on your show?
[Unknown]: Of course, please.
[Unknown]: I was like, fuck you, you're a quota kid.
[Guest]: You would have been nothing had it not been for a quota.
[Guest]: So, you know, I went to Vellum Boys School from class 1 to 6 and then Doon 7 to 12.
[Guest]: And in fact, my grandfather used to teach Tamil and English at Doon.
[Guest]: That's much before I was born.
[Guest]: So our family has been in Dehradun for a long time.
[Guest]: Mother is a Tamilian and father is a Punjabi.
[Guest]: But during the holidays, my dad was in the army.
[Guest]: So he was posted to, you know, Siliguri, Bhopal, Mathura.
[Guest]: We spent a lot of time in cantonments, which meant air rifles.
[Guest]: And now when I think of it, maybe that's how we've turned out so screwed up.
[Guest]: Like, I would never let my nephew go with an air gun to shoot squirrels and chameleons and birds.
[Guest]: But that's what we did, you know, because cantonments are safe.
[Guest]: The rule was you had to get back home when lights are on.
[Guest]: So you'd go into the bushes, you'd go into the thicket, you'd catch, you know,
[Guest]: in little Rasna bottles, we'd catch tadpoles and then watch them grow.
[Guest]: In Hajmola bottles, catch caterpillars, watch them become pupas and then butterflies.
[Guest]: And even Dehradun was like that.
[Guest]: You could go in. There was no fear.
[Guest]: Like from the time I was six or seven, I could walk anywhere I wanted.
[Guest]: My folks weren't worried.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was an idyllic childhood.
[Guest]: And school was, you know, although I was a day scholar till I was in class nine,
[Guest]: because I was allowed to be all the both well and do all boarding.
[Guest]: Because my mother was a teacher, I was allowed to go back home in the evening.
[Guest]: So it was fun.
[Guest]: I was a kind of, I won't say I was shy, but I was a quieter kid till I was maybe 12 or 13.
[Guest]: After which I became an aggressive boy.
[Guest]: I was very tiny. I was much smaller than all my batchmates.
[Guest]: I was like, you know, way, way smaller.
[Guest]: So I guess you compensate for that by being extremely aggressive.
[Guest]: Because you know, boarding school, it's like prison rules.
[Guest]: You know, if you don't push back, you.
[Guest]: So you have to compensate for size.
[Guest]: If, you know, if you fuck with me, I'm going to give you such a tongue lashing
[Guest]: and humiliate you in front of everybody.
[Guest]: So that's how you get a bit aggressive.
[Guest]: So now when I look back, I, you know, I'd like to not have been that aggressive
[Guest]: when I was in my teens.
[Guest]: But those are the two.
[Guest]: But yeah, before that, I was very quiet and retiring.
[Guest]: I have two older sisters.
[Guest]: So in any case, I was used to being quiet.
[Guest]: One is six years older, one is three years older.
[Guest]: And there was, you know, kite flying, going for those Jhankis of Ramlila,
[Guest]: watching the Ravan thing from the club.
[Guest]: And you were the youngest because all my sister's friends are much older than me.
[Guest]: So you, you were the sidekick who ran behind the gang.
[Guest]: No one really was looking out for you.
[Guest]: So it was a good, I'd say it was a very peaceful, happy childhood.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've seen pictures on your Instagram of your school years,
[Amit Varma]: I think where, you know, there's one picture of a group of you
[Amit Varma]: and someone makes a comment about which one is you.
[Amit Varma]: But I could make out you're kind of in the center.
[Amit Varma]: You're the same kind of face.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another one where there are, you know, one, two, three,
[Amit Varma]: it's like a vertical picture, people leaning on each other
[Amit Varma]: and you're the kid at the bottom.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you mentioned sort of like one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that I remember not just having in school,
[Amit Varma]: but kind of for much longer.
[Amit Varma]: And I think people have it throughout their lives.
[Amit Varma]: It's sort of the anxiety of fitting in, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where you're still kind of discovering who you are in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: as if that process is ever complete.
[Amit Varma]: But that's sort of a dominant anxiety for many people.
[Amit Varma]: At one level, the anxiety of fitting in.
[Amit Varma]: At another level, the anxiety of what people will think of you,
[Amit Varma]: which drives sometimes the things that you do,
[Unknown]: the music you listen to and the music you pretend to listen to,
[Amit Varma]: the books you carry around and the books you really enjoy reading
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of these things about myself,
[Amit Varma]: I realized only later through looking back,
[Amit Varma]: through self-reflection and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems you've also kind of done a little bit of that
[Amit Varma]: because you just use the phrase now when I look back, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you look back at the young Abhinandan,
[Amit Varma]: what were those anxieties?
[Amit Varma]: When did you lose those anxieties?
[Amit Varma]: Where does that process come if it is complete?
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's complete for you.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I kind of took a long time to get there.
[Amit Varma]: But where does it happen where you get comfortable in your own skin?
[Guest]: I mean, I would say there wasn't a time, like it wasn't an event.
[Guest]: It's more a process like the pupa turning into a butterfly kind of thing.
[Guest]: But yeah, I'd say maybe late 20s, early 30s onwards,
[Guest]: I was, you know, pretty sure of my confidence levels were solid.
[Guest]: It wasn't a put on confidence which you have when you're in your 20s.
[Guest]: Like you said, what is expected of you is like,
[Guest]: and I was always confident.
[Guest]: And I'll get into the reason why that is,
[Guest]: you know, when we get into this a little bit.
[Guest]: But the real confidence, I guess, only in your 30s
[Guest]: is when it kind of starts to develop.
[Guest]: Stuff like I love Punjabi music, right?
[Guest]: So if I was going to pick up a girl or, you know,
[Guest]: I would switch to English music, you know,
[Guest]: right up to your late 20s or 30s.
[Guest]: Now I don't give a shit.
[Guest]: I was like, fuck, I listen to Geeta Zelda.
[Unknown]: You want to sit, sit. You don't sit, don't sit.
[Guest]: So those kind of things, you know, take a little longer.
[Guest]: But I mean, yeah, that's when it happened.
[Guest]: And I think Delhi has a lot to do with it, you know,
[Guest]: because when I was young, when you talk about the anxieties,
[Guest]: one is, of course, your middle class.
[Guest]: And, you know, the way middle class is used is,
[Guest]: let's face it, I was privileged even though
[Guest]: I was not a Nikhil Nanda or Jyotirath Dasindhya,
[Guest]: but I was still more privileged than 90% of the country.
[Guest]: But because our society has been so, you know,
[Guest]: segmented that you're the bottom of the top.
[Guest]: So stuff like not being able to afford the shoes
[Guest]: that others could, you know, not be able to afford a Nike,
[Guest]: you wear power, it, you know,
[Guest]: it kind of bites you a little self-conscious about it.
[Guest]: But luckily it was never a big thing for me because my folks,
[Guest]: I mean, that was a new thing of what brand I was wearing
[Guest]: only when I, you know, in my teens.
[Guest]: Before that, because of the kind of people my parents are,
[Guest]: I was never even aware that there was anything
[Guest]: other than what we have.
[Guest]: One is because there was no cable TV.
[Guest]: So you didn't know.
[Guest]: B, that wasn't a priority in our house.
[Guest]: So you didn't know anyway.
[Guest]: And there was never any shame.
[Guest]: Like my mother comes from a family of, you know,
[Guest]: teachers and academics, like my aunts have been teachers,
[Guest]: my mother's a teacher, my grandfather's a teacher.
[Guest]: And, you know, there was a typical Tamilians
[Guest]: who really chatto a lot of books.
[Guest]: We had a lot of books at home.
[Guest]: Like we had more books than anything else, basically.
[Guest]: You may have a broken sofa, but your books are, you know,
[Guest]: kept well.
[Guest]: So there was never really that need.
[Guest]: But I did go through a phase, I'd say in my teens to college,
[Guest]: where you weren't, you were aware that you don't have
[Guest]: as much as the other kids who you grew up with.
[Guest]: But honestly, it did not impact me as much as it impacted
[Guest]: others around that I saw, you know, because there were
[Guest]: a lot of us who were service kids and a lot of us
[Guest]: who were, you know, very wealthy.
[Guest]: So it did impact me a little bit, but not enough
[Guest]: for it to take a knock on my confidence.
[Guest]: I would be self-conscious about it and sometimes
[Guest]: a little embarrassed, but not enough to not speak out.
[Guest]: So, yeah, and I think for that, you know,
[Guest]: my mom and my sisters are, and I do think,
[Guest]: I'm not married and I don't have kids,
[Guest]: but it's funny coming from me.
[Guest]: I think the unit of family, I mean, for all my progressive
[Guest]: and, you know, bohemian choices and angles in life,
[Guest]: from my experience, I'll say, if you have a solid family,
[Guest]: you can be so fucking confident that no one can shake that confidence.
[Guest]: Because no matter what I did, for my mother,
[Guest]: I was always a star.
[Guest]: You know, I'm always the star.
[Guest]: Even now she says, you know,
[Guest]: internet pe kuch chalata hoga type, you know, she's,
[Guest]: but, and I have two older sisters,
[Guest]: they're both really smart, bright, very independent.
[Guest]: So confidence was something that I saw and learned.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so I was conscious that I'm not as well off
[Guest]: as many of the kids I'm growing up with,
[Guest]: but, and sometimes I was embarrassed because,
[Guest]: like your car doesn't have an AC, your car may break down.
[Guest]: I have a secondhand Fiat, which is like 40,000 rupees.
[Guest]: And at that time, you know, Maruti 800s had just come out.
[Guest]: So people had Maruti 800s, some who were very rich had Mercedes.
[Guest]: And you're going for a, you know,
[Guest]: a friend's party who lives in this big bungalow
[Guest]: in North Delhi somewhere, and, you know,
[Guest]: his probably one wheel of his car is worth your car.
[Guest]: So that, you know, you, but otherwise, you know,
[Guest]: me and another friend of mine were both service background.
[Guest]: So we'd always say, you know,
[Guest]: our dads couldn't give us a BMW, but give us a car.
[Guest]: You know, that's, even if it didn't work half the time,
[Guest]: which is more than what a lot of others get, but yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, that kind of,
[Guest]: it vanished early enough for me for it to,
[Guest]: and even today money is not a motivation in my life.
[Guest]: I want to, you know, fairly comfortable life.
[Guest]: And I want choices, but I read, I mean,
[Guest]: I, you see how I dress, you know,
[Guest]: my entire wardrobe must be worth 20,000 rupees.
[Guest]: I don't give a fuck about that shit.
[Guest]: That's never been an issue, but it was when I was young.
[Guest]: I tell, you know, many of my younger peers this,
[Guest]: that when I wanted to buy expensive stuff,
[Guest]: I couldn't afford it.
[Guest]: So basically God outwits you.
[Guest]: He gives you what you want, but not when you want it.
[Guest]: And when he gives it to you, you don't want it.
[Guest]: So I was very, you know, keen to buy, you know,
[Guest]: shoes, kids that were expensive, you know,
[Guest]: back then Air Jordans and shit, you couldn't,
[Guest]: I couldn't afford them.
[Guest]: Now I may not be able to buy a Rolls,
[Guest]: but I can buy any shoe I want,
[Guest]: but I don't have anything other than juttis
[Guest]: and you know, my one pair of kids.
[Guest]: I used to love the Harley Davidson boots
[Guest]: because I'd seen friends of mine wear it.
[Guest]: And a pair of Harley Davidson boots at that time
[Guest]: was like 8,000, 7,000, I'm talking like nineties, man.
[Guest]: That was like, when I was a new strike,
[Guest]: my salary was three and a half thousand bucks.
[Guest]: So when you can afford it,
[Guest]: you just want Kolhapuri chappals and kurta pyjamas.
[Amit Varma]: So, so yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, maybe the mindset of not wanting things
[Amit Varma]: is also a kind of richness.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned the books that surrounded you in your house
[Amit Varma]: and you know how it didn't matter
[Amit Varma]: if the sofa was broken, the books were all around.
[Amit Varma]: And my childhood was similar to that,
[Amit Varma]: extremely privileged.
[Amit Varma]: My dad was a civil servant,
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by books all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what I remember.
[Amit Varma]: So my dad passed away earlier this year
[Amit Varma]: and we just sold his house
[Amit Varma]: and I have to go there next month
[Guest]: to clear out some of the stuff.
[Amit Varma]: This is in Chandigarh.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing that I think about most is books
[Amit Varma]: because all those books
[Amit Varma]: and I've got to find someone to give it away
[Amit Varma]: to some library or charity or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And all those books in a sense are my nursery.
[Amit Varma]: They are kind of what shaped me
[Amit Varma]: because as a kid, I just sort of grew up
[Amit Varma]: just reading all the time
[Amit Varma]: and in different ways,
[Amit Varma]: sort of forming my imaginative world there
[Amit Varma]: and kind of starting from there.
[Amit Varma]: What was it like for you?
[Amit Varma]: Because you mentioned your mother was also an academic.
[Amit Varma]: Her whole side of the family was academics.
[Amit Varma]: They were all obviously into reading.
[Amit Varma]: Reading must have been both something sacred
[Amit Varma]: and at the same time a source of great pleasure
[Amit Varma]: for all of you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: what kind of stuff you read.
[Amit Varma]: And of course we had a limited variety of books
[Amit Varma]: in general available.
[Amit Varma]: So kids would grow up reading the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: even the serious reading they would progress to
[Amit Varma]: would be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure there are lots of commonalities,
[Amit Varma]: but give me a sense of how that was shaping you.
[Guest]: A lot of what you read at that time
[Guest]: was because you heard your mother say,
[Guest]: oh, this is very good.
[Guest]: So you read it and you didn't really have a view
[Guest]: of what's good or bad.
[Guest]: You just read.
[Guest]: So my mother had this big collection,
[Guest]: she still does, of P.G. Woodhouse
[Unknown]: and Jeeves and all that.
[Guest]: So you went through those
[Guest]: before you really could understand them.
[Guest]: Like now when I think back,
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think, you know,
[Guest]: 13, 14-year-olds should be reading this,
[Guest]: especially someone who has no insight
[Guest]: or idea of British humor or British life
[Guest]: or British society.
[Guest]: There's a lot of that subtext
[Guest]: and that's the world it's in.
[Guest]: But you read it because you heard your mother say,
[Guest]: oh, how fine, haha, innit?
[Guest]: So you read it.
[Guest]: The other thing that my folks had
[Guest]: was they had all the reader's digests
[Guest]: because they used to subscribe
[Guest]: from like 72 onwards.
[Guest]: They were all...
[Guest]: So I got operated for appendicitis
[Guest]: when I was in class eight.
[Guest]: So I had to, you know,
[Guest]: be in bed for about 10, 12 days.
[Guest]: And during that time,
[Guest]: I chartered, like,
[Guest]: I think from 72, 73 onwards,
[Guest]: all the reader's digests.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: whether it's that drama in real life...
[Unknown]: Humor in uniform.
[Unknown]: Humor in uniform,
[Guest]: college humor,
[Guest]: laughter, the best medicine.
[Guest]: And of course,
[Guest]: there was drama in real life
[Guest]: and there used to be this,
[Guest]: you know, the long walk home type.
[Guest]: Later I got to know
[Guest]: there was a certain Christian angle
[Guest]: to the reader's digest.
[Guest]: So all these stories
[Guest]: had a certain message
[Guest]: about there being a God
[Guest]: and you should be good.
[Guest]: And it was subliminal.
[Guest]: Of course, it didn't
[Guest]: convert you to Christianity
[Guest]: in case everyone wants to go
[Guest]: and, you know, attack the reader's digest.
[Guest]: But later I understood
[Guest]: that there was a certain politics
[Guest]: behind that as well.
[Guest]: But I charted all that.
[Guest]: Then you try to pick up stuff
[Guest]: that is way beyond your league,
[Guest]: like War and Peace
[Guest]: and Thorn Birds,
[Guest]: which used to be this thick book.
[Amit Varma]: Colin McAloo, I remember that.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: you pick those up,
[Guest]: you abandon those halfway,
[Guest]: but you learn something.
[Guest]: You learn English words.
[Guest]: Then there was a lot of Thomas Hardy,
[Guest]: which I would still recommend,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, I wouldn't recommend it
[Guest]: to someone your in my age
[Guest]: because there's a certain,
[Guest]: you know, I don't mean Tess
[Guest]: and Jude the Obscure,
[Guest]: which are very depressing,
[Guest]: but, you know,
[Guest]: Return of the Native
[Guest]: or Far From the Madding Crowd.
[Guest]: There's a certain Yash Chopra-esque-ness
[Guest]: to his books.
[Guest]: There's the hero
[Guest]: and there's the Evelyn Bathsheba.
[Guest]: She's vain.
[Guest]: And then, you know,
[Guest]: she falls in love with someone
[Guest]: and then, you know,
[Guest]: the other guy comes
[Guest]: and, you know, saves her
[Guest]: and then there's some tragedy.
[Guest]: So, I mean,
[Guest]: I think Thomas Hardy was,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the thinking man,
[Guest]: Yash Chopra.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: those kind of books were there.
[Guest]: So those you appreciated
[Guest]: at a younger age.
[Guest]: And I still would recommend them
[Guest]: to people who are young
[Guest]: because I think there's a lot,
[Guest]: I mean, there's something,
[Guest]: there's a feel-good factor.
[Guest]: You learn something,
[Guest]: he writes well,
[Guest]: it's a story well told.
[Guest]: Then, of course,
[Guest]: you had the, you know,
[Guest]: she had all those classics,
[Guest]: Leo Tolstoy and Dickens,
[Guest]: Shakespeare.
[Guest]: In fact,
[Guest]: we still have some of,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: those ones which have that
[Guest]: that orange with the gold emboss,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: the books I'm talking about.
[Guest]: So, I still have those lying.
[Guest]: You don't have the heart
[Guest]: to throw them.
[Guest]: Although,
[Guest]: when my mom sold a house
[Guest]: in Dehradun
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: moved to Delhi
[Guest]: because here there was a flat,
[Guest]: the books couldn't fit here.
[Guest]: So, we gave a lot of them
[Guest]: and that was pretty heartbreaking.
[Guest]: I would have loved
[Guest]: to get them all
[Guest]: because you can't accommodate
[Guest]: those books
[Guest]: in an apartment
[Guest]: which you could in a,
[Guest]: you know,
[Unknown]: in a bungalow
[Guest]: in Dehradun
[Guest]: in a bungalow
[Guest]: in Dehradun.
[Guest]: So, yeah,
[Guest]: that was the kind of stuff
[Guest]: and my sister,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I've even read
[Guest]: Mills and Boons,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: because my sister went
[Guest]: through the
[Guest]: Mills and Boons phase.
[Guest]: So, it was lying there.
[Guest]: You read it,
[Guest]: of course,
[Guest]: they'd laugh at you
[Guest]: but you read it.
[Guest]: But, you know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: when you grow up
[Guest]: with two sisters
[Guest]: much older than you,
[Guest]: you get bullied a lot.
[Guest]: Like, A,
[Guest]: you get bashed
[Guest]: really badly
[Guest]: because I don't know
[Guest]: whether it's gendered
[Guest]: to say this now
[Guest]: but, you know,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: if you're an older brother
[Guest]: and you hit
[Guest]: a younger sister,
[Guest]: I'm sure the parents
[Guest]: will, like, whack you
[Amit Varma]: but, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as my older sisters
[Guest]: and I was much tinier
[Guest]: so...
[Guest]: They're going to listen
[Guest]: to this and they're
[Guest]: going to whack you again.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: And then stuff do,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: cruel things like
[Guest]: paint your nails
[Guest]: and then you don't
[Guest]: know how to get it off
[Guest]: because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're, like,
[Amit Varma]: six, seven.
[Amit Varma]: You try to wash it off
[Amit Varma]: and it doesn't come off
[Amit Varma]: and then you have to
[Amit Varma]: go to school the next day
[Guest]: and I'm like,
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: class one, two
[Guest]: in an all-boys school,
[Guest]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: it can get cruel.
[Unknown]: They say,
[Guest]: what the fuck are you wearing?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you're a girl,
[Guest]: type shit.
[Guest]: So then, of course,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: my mom took it off
[Guest]: when I went back,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: so you,
[Guest]: shit like that happens
[Guest]: so you pick up their books,
[Guest]: you learn,
[Guest]: you...
[Guest]: But one thing
[Guest]: about growing up
[Guest]: with two older sisters
[Guest]: is you,
[Guest]: you have a
[Guest]: richer and more,
[Guest]: a better sense of
[Guest]: who you are.
[Guest]: That's the upside
[Guest]: of having
[Guest]: a bruised face
[Guest]: and nails
[Guest]: on your
[Guest]: sweater.
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: so that was,
[Guest]: and there was a lot
[Guest]: of kite flying,
[Guest]: I remember,
[Guest]: in Dehradun.
[Amit Varma]: I used to fly kites.
[Amit Varma]: It was fun.
[Amit Varma]: What did you want to be
[Amit Varma]: at this point in time?
[Amit Varma]: when you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: did you,
[Amit Varma]: for example,
[Amit Varma]: ever have any
[Amit Varma]: inkling of the career
[Amit Varma]: you would go on to have?
[Amit Varma]: Did you want to write
[Guest]: because you read so much
[Guest]: or were you just going
[Guest]: with the flow?
[Guest]: And also,
[Guest]: Amit, you know,
[Guest]: you were the same age
[Guest]: as I am.
[Guest]: There were not
[Guest]: just options
[Guest]: that were there.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: what do you want to be?
[Unknown]: Whatever job you get,
[Unknown]: take it, son.
[Guest]: You don't have
[Guest]: the means to think about it.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I was in that zone.
[Guest]: there was a time
[Guest]: when, you know,
[Guest]: in class 11,
[Guest]: you read Fountainhead
[Guest]: and you want to be
[Guest]: an architect,
[Guest]: which is like
[Guest]: a dumb thing to do,
[Guest]: but I guess I went
[Guest]: through that phase
[Guest]: and I actually did.
[Unknown]: Not at my age,
[Unknown]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe if you're a teen.
[Guest]: Maybe if you're 7,
[Guest]: yeah.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: I honestly had no idea.
[Guest]: I stumbled into journalism
[Guest]: and I'll tell you how.
[Guest]: I had no idea
[Guest]: what I wanted to be.
[Guest]: But one thing
[Guest]: I remember
[Guest]: very early in life
[Guest]: at the back of my head
[Guest]: was that
[Guest]: I want to do something
[Guest]: on my own.
[Guest]: I don't want to be,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: reporting to a boss.
[Guest]: That,
[Guest]: I had articulated it
[Guest]: a few times,
[Guest]: but then I shut up
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: you don't have the ability
[Guest]: to speak.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I would just keep,
[Guest]: but I remember
[Guest]: that was
[Guest]: a key,
[Guest]: that was the only thing
[Amit Varma]: that I knew.
[Amit Varma]: Why did you feel like that?
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: can you put a finger on it?
[Guest]: I don't know, yeah.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: my college years
[Guest]: were
[Guest]: completely
[Guest]: uncush free.
[Guest]: There was no one
[Guest]: watching over me.
[Guest]: My sisters were either
[Guest]: here or abroad.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: I was pretty much,
[Guest]: my parents weren't really
[Guest]: with me here at the time.
[Guest]: And I was a bit
[Guest]: adrift in college.
[Guest]: I was,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: no one was there
[Guest]: to ask me,
[Guest]: have you
[Guest]: gone to class?
[Guest]: Have you not gone to class?
[Guest]: So I was doing
[Amit Varma]: what the fuck
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to do.
[Guest]: This was Hansraj,
[Guest]: you wouldn't get no marks.
[Guest]: Hansraj,
[Guest]: that was my second year.
[Guest]: I remember,
[Guest]: this thing was zero,
[Guest]: because you could get
[Guest]: the admit card
[Guest]: by one old monk.
[Guest]: Bottle was enough
[Guest]: to get your admit card
[Guest]: even if you didn't
[Guest]: have the attendance.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I think at that phase,
[Guest]: I was at my
[Guest]: rebellious
[Guest]: best,
[Guest]: worst,
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: what the...
[Guest]: Peak.
[Unknown]: Yeah,
[Unknown]: at peak,
[Guest]: yes,
[Guest]: yes.
[Guest]: Let's keep it neutral.
[Guest]: It was in a good or bad way.
[Guest]: And at that time,
[Guest]: I think that
[Guest]: those years
[Guest]: formed my personality
[Guest]: to a great extent.
[Guest]: And then I had,
[Guest]: I think I had become
[Guest]: a kind of person
[Guest]: who I knew
[Guest]: would not,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: survive in a job
[Guest]: for very long.
[Guest]: In the long run,
[Guest]: I would need to do
[Guest]: something on my own.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: that's all I can answer.
[Amit Varma]: I guess because of
[Guest]: the rebelliousness.
[Guest]: Rebelliousness
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: and yeah,
[Guest]: you just,
[Guest]: you just felt
[Guest]: that I have
[Guest]: some,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I want to do something
[Guest]: that is not this,
[Guest]: this or that.
[Guest]: It'll be something else.
[Amit Varma]: But that's something else
[Amit Varma]: was vague at the time.
[Guest]: It was vague.
[Guest]: I didn't know.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: when I was in college,
[Guest]: I,
[Guest]: in fact,
[Unknown]: I wrote a few articles
[Guest]: for a magazine
[Guest]: called Parenting Here.
[Unknown]: It used to be a
[Unknown]: magazine for parenting.
[Guest]: What did you,
[Guest]: what did you write for them?
[Guest]: I wrote book reviews.
[Amit Varma]: Oh,
[Guest]: okay,
[Amit Varma]: that's cool.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I had,
[Guest]: while I was in college,
[Guest]: I,
[Guest]: I had a huge,
[Guest]: I used to read a lot
[Guest]: because you have a lot of time.
[Guest]: You have a lot of intelligence,
[Guest]: cerebral people.
[Guest]: And that I wasn't a talker.
[Guest]: I was a listener
[Guest]: because in any case,
[Guest]: when you have sisters
[Guest]: six years older than you,
[Guest]: you are not expected to talk.
[Guest]: So you just listen.
[Guest]: So I absorbed a lot
[Guest]: and I knew what to read,
[Guest]: what to pick.
[Guest]: And in college,
[Guest]: I was the talker.
[Guest]: And there,
[Guest]: the people who I was
[Guest]: hanging out with weren't,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: they would not
[Guest]: be even allowed
[Guest]: into the circle
[Guest]: that my sister hung with,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Unknown]: whether it was a Bundy house,
[Guest]: theater,
[Guest]: that kind of,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: these are the people
[Guest]: who the police would drag.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: DU today
[Guest]: is a very tame version
[Guest]: of Delhi University
[Guest]: of the 90s.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: there,
[Guest]: I've seen such horrible fights
[Guest]: which used to happen
[Guest]: between Hindu college
[Guest]: and Khalsa.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the Kirodimal guys
[Guest]: would come and bash up
[Guest]: someone in the Hindu hostel
[Guest]: and then 50 guys
[Guest]: would march out
[Guest]: and bash up
[Guest]: 10 other people.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I had friends
[Guest]: in the hostel there.
[Guest]: Fuck a book,
[Guest]: they wouldn't even
[Guest]: have a bunch of friends
[Guest]: like that in college.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: it was this,
[Guest]: and I appreciated them,
[Guest]: I liked them,
[Guest]: it taught you survival.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: one thing I'll say
[Guest]: is Delhi University,
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: what it's like today
[Guest]: because I believe
[Guest]: now you have to
[Unknown]: get an ID card
[Guest]: to get in.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: if you've seen
[Guest]: Rang De Basanti,
[Guest]: what I liked about
[Guest]: Rang De Basanti
[Guest]: was a very accurate
[Unknown]: reflection of DU.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that DJ guy,
[Guest]: Aamir Khan.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: when we were in college,
[Guest]: we used to hang out
[Guest]: with DJs
[Guest]: for the last 10-12 years.
[Guest]: In fact,
[Guest]: they used to,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: some of them
[Guest]: in the Jubilee Hall,
[Guest]: they had their wives
[Guest]: and all.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: there were 35-year-olds
[Guest]: and DJ when he says,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when he says
[Guest]: that you're already
[Guest]: in your mid-30s,
[Guest]: what are you still doing
[Guest]: hanging out in college
[Guest]: with us?
[Guest]: He says,
[Guest]: yahan DJ ki koi
[Guest]: aukaat hai.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I've known many guys
[Guest]: like that,
[Guest]: which were Rakesh Mehra
[Guest]: and he's a DU product.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: someone from
[Guest]: my DU days
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: they don't come
[Guest]: from backgrounds
[Guest]: like you and I.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: like I said,
[Guest]: we may not have been rich
[Guest]: but we are privileged.
[Guest]: Just the privilege of confidence
[Guest]: is a big thing.
[Unknown]: I mean,
[Guest]: you have already
[Guest]: 2000 books at home
[Guest]: is more than what
[Guest]: people have all their lives.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: you're talking about people
[Guest]: who
[Guest]: are from,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I don't want to get
[Guest]: into locality names
[Guest]: but a basti type locality
[Guest]: in North Delhi
[Guest]: where
[Guest]: forget it,
[Guest]: broken on fiat,
[Guest]: there is no chance
[Guest]: of a car.
[Guest]: In DU,
[Guest]: even if
[Guest]: and I don't want to
[Guest]: take too many names
[Guest]: to embarrass those here
[Guest]: but there is a very
[Guest]: prominent industrial
[Guest]: house
[Guest]: in Delhi.
[Guest]: I've seen
[Guest]: that boy
[Guest]: get walloped
[Guest]: in the middle
[Guest]: of Hindu College
[Guest]: by this one guy
[Guest]: who would not,
[Guest]: who would probably be
[Guest]: socially
[Guest]: at that guy's
[Guest]: driver's level
[Guest]: and then him
[Guest]: come the next day
[Guest]: with his cousin
[Guest]: and say,
[Guest]: Amit Bhai,
[Guest]: maaf kar do,
[Guest]: what can we do for you?
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: Amit Bhai
[Guest]: must have been like
[Guest]: 10 years older than us,
[Guest]: maybe 14
[Guest]: but he would never
[Guest]: leave college
[Guest]: because outside college
[Guest]: he was
[Guest]: the son of a driver.
[Guest]: There,
[Guest]: a guy who drove
[Guest]: a Mercedes
[Guest]: would come and
[Guest]: touch his feet.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: he never would
[Guest]: leave college.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: DU really makes you
[Guest]: survive.
[Guest]: That's why
[Guest]: DU is a very
[Guest]: aggressive place
[Guest]: but I think
[Guest]: it taught me to
[Guest]: get on with the
[Guest]: Chandrawal,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: goons.
[Guest]: It taught me to
[Guest]: kind of hold my own,
[Guest]: not,
[Guest]: get,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: don't get into combat
[Guest]: but don't back off either
[Guest]: because then they'll
[Guest]: fucking eat you up.
[Guest]: Make it known that
[Guest]: I'm not going to
[Guest]: attack you
[Guest]: but you may
[Guest]: wallop me
[Guest]: but I will create
[Guest]: a scene in the canteen
[Guest]: that may compromise
[Guest]: your...
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it teaches you these
[Guest]: survival in the forest
[Guest]: kind of thing.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I think that
[Guest]: shaped a lot of me,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when I was a teen
[Guest]: and growing up
[Guest]: and because
[Guest]: in Delhi
[Guest]: and also you come
[Guest]: from Dehradun, right?
[Guest]: I was in Dehradun
[Guest]: from the time I was
[Guest]: born to the time
[Guest]: I was 12.
[Guest]: You come to Delhi
[Guest]: where suddenly it
[Guest]: matters,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: who you are.
[Guest]: One of the reasons
[Guest]: it didn't matter
[Guest]: because in Dehradun
[Guest]: it didn't fucking matter.
[Guest]: Even if you had
[Guest]: a lot of money,
[Guest]: you could do
[Guest]: nothing with it.
[Guest]: You still would
[Guest]: walk and,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: go to the Indian
[Guest]: Dune Club
[Guest]: with the
[Guest]: dance floor would shake
[Guest]: and all the kids
[Guest]: would run around
[Guest]: and do
[Guest]: Kalabhaji type
[Guest]: things,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: But suddenly
[Guest]: here,
[Guest]: there was
[Guest]: wealth.
[Guest]: It was 92,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: reforms had just
[Guest]: kicked in
[Guest]: from everybody
[Guest]: having ambassadors
[Guest]: and Fiats
[Guest]: or no car.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: there were
[Guest]: Maruti 800s
[Guest]: coming.
[Guest]: 118NE was
[Guest]: one of the
[Guest]: premium cars
[Amit Varma]: for everybody.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier that
[Amit Varma]: in school
[Amit Varma]: to kind of
[Amit Varma]: survive there,
[Amit Varma]: to do your thing,
[Amit Varma]: your strategy was
[Amit Varma]: to be aggressive
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of
[Amit Varma]: regret that later.
[Amit Varma]: And here you said
[Amit Varma]: that in college
[Amit Varma]: the strategy,
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it was a fine dance
[Amit Varma]: obviously,
[Amit Varma]: but you learned
[Guest]: how to get along
[Guest]: with people.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: what was that
[Guest]: aggression like
[Guest]: in school,
[Guest]: for example?
[Guest]: I had a good
[Guest]: vocabulary.
[Guest]: I could
[Guest]: construct a sentence
[Guest]: and I'm still
[Guest]: considered a funny guy
[Guest]: by many people.
[Guest]: Although I'm,
[Guest]: I think a lot of
[Unknown]: my jokes are
[Unknown]: uncle jokes.
[Unknown]: The youngsters
[Amit Varma]: in office tell me
[Amit Varma]: that this is,
[Amit Varma]: your jokes are
[Guest]: very uncle jokes.
[Guest]: That's very rude.
[Guest]: But like,
[Guest]: if someone would,
[Guest]: I'd feel this guy
[Guest]: is at the back
[Guest]: of his mind,
[Guest]: he may
[Guest]: threaten me.
[Guest]: A,
[Guest]: I had a lot of
[Guest]: friends.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: we had a bunch of,
[Guest]: we were a pack,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: that was one
[Guest]: kind of
[Guest]: insulation
[Guest]: from anyone
[Guest]: trying to bully me.
[Guest]: The second was,
[Guest]: I was extremely
[Guest]: cutting and nasty
[Guest]: when I would
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: rip through someone
[Guest]: and I would make sure
[Guest]: I do it
[Guest]: during toy time
[Guest]: and everyone
[Guest]: sitting and studying.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I'd say,
[Guest]: you just be nasty.
[Guest]: You just say things
[Guest]: and when you're like
[Guest]: 13, 14
[Guest]: and you're humiliated
[Guest]: like that
[Guest]: in front of people,
[Guest]: you start crying.
[Guest]: And when someone
[Guest]: starts crying,
[Guest]: why the fuck
[Guest]: are you crying?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: you do shit like that.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: then you know that
[Guest]: this guy is not
[Guest]: going to pick on you
[Guest]: next.
[Guest]: He'll pick on
[Guest]: someone else
[Guest]: because he may
[Guest]: wallop you
[Guest]: but you've
[Guest]: humiliated him
[Guest]: in the middle
[Guest]: of.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: when that,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: those are the
[Guest]: kind of
[Guest]: survival devices
[Guest]: you use.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: you don't dissect
[Guest]: them when you're
[Guest]: young.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: the next guy
[Guest]: does not
[Amit Varma]: pick on me.
[Amit Varma]: And you meet
[Amit Varma]: some of those guys
[Amit Varma]: now?
[Amit Varma]: Like,
[Amit Varma]: what is it like?
[Amit Varma]: have you ever
[Amit Varma]: met someone
[Amit Varma]: who you made
[Amit Varma]: cry or vice versa?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: and is it
[Guest]: that the
[Guest]: shared
[Guest]: understanding
[Guest]: that what
[Guest]: happened in
[Guest]: Vegas stays
[Guest]: in Vegas
[Guest]: sort of?
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: we had our
[Guest]: 25th anniversary
[Guest]: a long time
[Guest]: he's a lawyer
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I met him
[Guest]: when I was
[Guest]: at NewsTrek
[Guest]: and CP
[Guest]: and he was
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: now,
[Guest]: this is what I
[Guest]: mean,
[Guest]: sometimes you
[Guest]: don't even
[Guest]: do it knowing
[Guest]: who you're
[Guest]: doing it to.
[Guest]: So,
[Unknown]: I said,
[Unknown]: hey,
[Guest]: what's up?
[Guest]: He said,
[Guest]: He says,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I'm studying
[Guest]: law because
[Guest]: that time,
[Guest]: I had started
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: at Dune you're
[Guest]: just like 70 guys
[Guest]: a batch.
[Guest]: So,
[Unknown]: you know everybody
[Unknown]: pretty and you've
[Guest]: spent six years
[Guest]: with them
[Guest]: because no one
[Guest]: can join like
[Guest]: an eight night,
[Guest]: you have to join
[Guest]: from the seventh
[Guest]: onwards.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know each
[Guest]: other pretty well,
[Guest]: you're close.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: he said that
[Guest]: damn,
[Guest]: it's good to sit
[Guest]: and have lunch
[Guest]: with you because
[Guest]: I couldn't stand
[Guest]: you in school
[Guest]: and I was
[Guest]: stunned.
[Guest]: I was really
[Guest]: mean.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: But I said,
[Guest]: I didn't say anything
[Guest]: to you.
[Guest]: He says,
[Guest]: no,
[Guest]: but that was
[Guest]: enough for me
[Guest]: not to like you.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you figure stuff
[Guest]: out after that,
[Guest]: but no,
[Guest]: it's not,
[Guest]: but like I said,
[Guest]: I wasn't like,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Unknown]: I wouldn't say
[Guest]: I was,
[Guest]: I'd pick on anyone,
[Guest]: I'd,
[Guest]: that would happen,
[Guest]: tomorrow I would,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I'd bat with someone
[Guest]: and tomorrow I really
[Guest]: don't care.
[Guest]: It's gone.
[Guest]: It's,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I'm happy to start again.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: it was,
[Guest]: you realize that
[Guest]: some people do
[Guest]: keep that in mind
[Guest]: for a while,
[Guest]: but it's not so much
[Guest]: that there's any animosity
[Guest]: with anybody.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: in fact,
[Guest]: one of the guys
[Guest]: I didn't really like
[Guest]: when I was in school,
[Guest]: I used to find him
[Guest]: really
[Guest]: a nasty piece of work
[Guest]: and we had a,
[Guest]: one of those,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: little gang battles
[Guest]: in school.
[Guest]: It was a new fashion.
[Unknown]: It wasn't as common
[Unknown]: as it is now.
[Guest]: It had just come in
[Guest]: and it was a
[Guest]: dengue hemorrhagic,
[Unknown]: hemorrhagic,
[Unknown]: I don't know how to pronounce it,
[Guest]: when you hemorrhage.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I hemorrhaged from my nose
[Guest]: and I wouldn't stop bleeding.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: for two days
[Guest]: and my platelet count
[Guest]: had gone down
[Guest]: to like some
[Guest]: 22,000,
[Guest]: 18,000,
[Guest]: it was going that low
[Guest]: and you don't plot.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I needed four units
[Guest]: of platelets every day
[Guest]: and those days,
[Guest]: all these fancy hospitals
[Guest]: were on there.
[Unknown]: So,
[Guest]: there were two places
[Guest]: and it was some fancy place
[Guest]: and we could only afford
[Guest]: the Red Cross
[Guest]: because it was free
[Guest]: but you had to go with
[Guest]: the person who's going
[Guest]: to give you blood.
[Guest]: They'd give blood.
[Guest]: They'd separate platelets
[Guest]: and give you platelets.
[Unknown]: So,
[Guest]: I needed four every day
[Guest]: for four days.
[Guest]: That's 16 people
[Guest]: and my sister would go there
[Unknown]: and,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Guest]: she'd call up my friends
[Guest]: and that's when I realized,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: family and friends
[Guest]: are worth more than,
[Guest]: it's a cliche
[Guest]: and I'm sure people say it
[Guest]: and maybe don't mean it.
[Guest]: I fucking absolutely
[Unknown]: swear by that,
[Unknown]: you know.
[Guest]: The source of confidence
[Guest]: comes from family and friends.
[Guest]: You can't get from money.
[Guest]: You can't get from anything else.
[Amit Varma]: And this guy came.
[Amit Varma]: He was one of the guys.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this guy who couldn't stand.
[Guest]: every day my sister would come
[Unknown]: and say,
[Unknown]: I said,
[Guest]: who all gave today?
[Guest]: So and so.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: she was like,
[Guest]: she took his name.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: what the fuck?
[Guest]: He said,
[Guest]: yeah.
[Guest]: And he came with four people
[Guest]: and he was doing really well.
[Guest]: He's one of the most
[Guest]: successful guys of our batch
[Guest]: and she said,
[Guest]: he came with four guys
[Guest]: from his office.
[Guest]: He made them come with him
[Guest]: and they were friends
[Guest]: because when I was there,
[Guest]: there were a lot of people
[Guest]: who need platelets at the time.
[Guest]: The people who would
[Guest]: need it for units,
[Unknown]: but they could only get one.
[Unknown]: And she says,
[Guest]: for you,
[Guest]: there'd be like 10 guys there
[Guest]: and I'd say,
[Guest]: we only need four.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: six of you go back,
[Guest]: come tomorrow.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: a lot of the other people
[Guest]: would say,
[Guest]: can two of yours
[Guest]: please give to us
[Guest]: because we don't have
[Guest]: four people here.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I am with three people
[Guest]: who gave me blood at the time
[Guest]: and I was like,
[Guest]: I called him.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: dude,
[Guest]: there's enough
[Guest]: informality to say,
[Guest]: why the f**k
[Guest]: did you come here
[Guest]: and you're not friends.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: you can say that
[Guest]: without it being
[Guest]: mean or malicious
[Guest]: because you've
[Guest]: grown up together.
[Guest]: You knew
[Guest]: when it was
[Guest]: that you saw
[Guest]: your first porn,
[Guest]: when it was
[Guest]: that you discovered it.
[Unknown]: You know everything
[Guest]: about everyone
[Guest]: because in a boarding school,
[Guest]: that's how it is.
[Guest]: He's like,
[Guest]: no dude,
[Guest]: you f**king,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: one of our batch mates
[Guest]: said that you had
[Guest]: and I was like,
[Guest]: f**k that.
[Guest]: You should just,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it's not worth
[Guest]: carrying them.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: when you look back at that
[Amit Varma]: and you know,
[Amit Varma]: even I sort of
[Amit Varma]: look back on my past
[Amit Varma]: and the person I was
[Amit Varma]: and I sometimes wonder
[Amit Varma]: how someone who knew me
[Amit Varma]: in my 20s
[Amit Varma]: can be friends
[Amit Varma]: with me today
[Amit Varma]: and that is also
[Amit Varma]: one reason that
[Amit Varma]: I don't like to be quick
[Amit Varma]: to judge other people.
[Amit Varma]: Like today,
[Amit Varma]: we live in an age
[Amit Varma]: where everybody
[Amit Varma]: is so judgmental,
[Amit Varma]: especially and I think
[Amit Varma]: social media
[Amit Varma]: has made that worse
[Amit Varma]: where it's almost
[Amit Varma]: as if by picking on
[Amit Varma]: some random thing
[Amit Varma]: by standing in judgment
[Amit Varma]: over them in a sense
[Amit Varma]: you're showing
[Amit Varma]: how virtuous you are.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: we are no longer
[Amit Varma]: willing to give people
[Amit Varma]: the benefit of the doubt.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe so and so
[Amit Varma]: meant something else.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it was a weak moment.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they did this then
[Amit Varma]: but they're a different
[Amit Varma]: person now,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I just think that
[Amit Varma]: we contain multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: we're always changing
[Amit Varma]: and we are all
[Amit Varma]: essentially the same,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: at the end of the day
[Amit Varma]: it's an accident of,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: nature and nurture
[Amit Varma]: and whatever happens
[Amit Varma]: to you and all of that
[Amit Varma]: that kind of makes us
[Amit Varma]: be different people
[Amit Varma]: think about that
[Amit Varma]: aspect of things
[Amit Varma]: because
[Amit Varma]: you are also
[Amit Varma]: very active on social media
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even more than me
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: this is something that
[Amit Varma]: I kind of find
[Amit Varma]: disturbing
[Amit Varma]: because especially
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter shitter
[Amit Varma]: what you kind of get
[Amit Varma]: is that everyone is
[Amit Varma]: kind of
[Amit Varma]: signaling
[Amit Varma]: and that requires
[Amit Varma]: this extreme kind of
[Amit Varma]: aggression
[Amit Varma]: always shitting on people
[Amit Varma]: not even,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: like one of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of mottos of any group
[Amit Varma]: I'm part of is
[Amit Varma]: assume goodwill,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: You begin,
[Amit Varma]: that is a default,
[Amit Varma]: if there's something wrong
[Amit Varma]: it's okay to assume
[Amit Varma]: that it's a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: What is
[Amit Varma]: sort of your sense
[Amit Varma]: of that because
[Amit Varma]: I find young people
[Amit Varma]: rushing to judgment
[Amit Varma]: rushing to hardened
[Amit Varma]: positions
[Amit Varma]: and those hardened
[Amit Varma]: positions,
[Amit Varma]: in fact,
[Amit Varma]: are saved forever
[Amit Varma]: on social media
[Amit Varma]: like if some
[Amit Varma]: of the stuff
[Guest]: I wrote or thought
[Guest]: when I was 20
[Guest]: imagine dude
[Guest]: there would be
[Guest]: screenshots of that
[Guest]: today
[Guest]: if those moments
[Guest]: are stored in
[Amit Varma]: frustration
[Amit Varma]: like I'd be
[Amit Varma]: cancelled
[Amit Varma]: a million times over
[Amit Varma]: I feel that
[Amit Varma]: somehow in this
[Amit Varma]: performative age
[Amit Varma]: in this angry age
[Amit Varma]: that space to grow
[Amit Varma]: for young people
[Amit Varma]: isn't there
[Guest]: what are your
[Guest]: sort of thoughts on that?
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this is something
[Guest]: that I think about
[Guest]: a lot
[Guest]: and I don't mind
[Guest]: think by default
[Guest]: actively think
[Guest]: about what
[Guest]: what is it
[Guest]: that drives this
[Guest]: on social media
[Guest]: what
[Guest]: even my behavior
[Guest]: on social media
[Guest]: has evolved
[Guest]: when I was
[Guest]: I got onto Twitter
[Guest]: because during the
[Guest]: Jan Lokpal movement
[Guest]: we were using
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: what do you call it
[Guest]: SMS
[Unknown]: SMS
[Unknown]: and then you know
[Guest]: Sibbal and Jadambaram
[Guest]: they blocked it
[Guest]: that you couldn't do
[Guest]: then we had to
[Guest]: so that's how
[Guest]: I got on Twitter
[Guest]: and in fact
[Guest]: that time
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: Arvind also got on
[Guest]: Twitter at that time
[Guest]: and everybody
[Guest]: this is something
[Guest]: that can be used
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: then the Jan Lokpal
[Guest]: movement turned into
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: so that time
[Guest]: we had
[Guest]: Lokpal
[Guest]: debates
[Guest]: and it was all about that
[Guest]: it was more a tool
[Guest]: because I wasn't
[Guest]: really a social media
[Guest]: friendly kind of guy
[Guest]: it's not something
[Guest]: that comes naturally
[Guest]: to me
[Guest]: then when you're
[Guest]: on it
[Guest]: there's that
[Guest]: slight headiness
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: oh dude
[Guest]: I've got so many followers
[Guest]: because I'm your
[Guest]: fucking bloody
[Guest]: prime time
[Guest]: talking shit
[Guest]: every night
[Amit Varma]: of course you'll
[Guest]: get followers
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: like
[Guest]: I still see people
[Guest]: our age
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: you suddenly had
[Guest]: a lot of followers
[Guest]: people like
[Guest]: were saying nice
[Guest]: things to you
[Guest]: because you know
[Guest]: that time it was
[Guest]: fashionable to
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: support the
[Guest]: Jan Lokpal
[Guest]: movement
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: we can get into
[Guest]: that later
[Guest]: because I know
[Guest]: you can't stand
[Guest]: Arvind and
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: we should
[Guest]: talk about that
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: that was
[Guest]: one phase
[Guest]: then
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: I started
[Guest]: talking to people
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: it was this
[Guest]: there was no
[Guest]: filter
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: you just
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: Time Magazine
[Guest]: has done a
[Guest]: cover story
[Guest]: on the
[Guest]: online
[Guest]: disinhibition
[Guest]: syndrome
[Guest]: so I was
[Guest]: victim of
[Guest]: the online
[Guest]: disinhibition
[Guest]: syndrome
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: after that
[Guest]: I don't
[Guest]: now respond
[Guest]: to trolls
[Guest]: once in a
[Guest]: while
[Guest]: if I'm
[Guest]: one
[Guest]: and it'll be a
[Guest]: strategic response
[Guest]: I'll be responding
[Guest]: for a reason
[Guest]: that may not
[Guest]: be apparent
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: there is a
[Guest]: reason I'm
[Guest]: responding to
[Guest]: this particular
[Guest]: one
[Guest]: I always
[Guest]: respond to
[Guest]: compliments
[Guest]: thank you
[Guest]: subscribe
[Guest]: pay to keep
[Guest]: news free
[Guest]: I keep
[Guest]: hammering that
[Guest]: in
[Guest]: I always
[Guest]: thank those
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: taking a
[Guest]: position
[Guest]: on
[Amit Varma]: the
[Amit Varma]: death
[Amit Varma]: penalty
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: think
[Guest]: in my
[Amit Varma]: early
[Guest]: 40s
[Guest]: or maybe
[Guest]: when I was
[Guest]: 40
[Guest]: but right
[Guest]: from my
[Guest]: late
[Guest]: 20s
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: my
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: late
[Guest]: 30s
[Guest]: it was
[Guest]: evolving
[Guest]: based on
[Guest]: what I
[Guest]: was
[Guest]: doing
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: kept
[Guest]: evolving
[Guest]: based on
[Guest]: what I
[Guest]: read
[Guest]: what
[Guest]: Twitter
[Guest]: what people
[Guest]: end up doing
[Guest]: and they
[Guest]: don't have
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: take a
[Guest]: very firm
[Guest]: position
[Guest]: which is
[Guest]: not
[Guest]: thought
[Guest]: through
[Guest]: and because
[Guest]: you have
[Guest]: taken that
[Guest]: position
[Guest]: it's that
[Guest]: cognitive
[Guest]: dissonance
[Guest]: because you
[Guest]: said
[Guest]: some
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: very
[Guest]: firm
[Guest]: position
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: very
[Guest]: firm
[Guest]: position
[Guest]: which
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: have
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: like everyone okay not everyone too many people I know who are young have anxiety
[Guest]: I can't do this I have anxiety you know we can't do this on that day I have to
[Guest]: see my therapist I have anxiety one is you should have anxiety you can't go
[Guest]: through life with a sense of Buddha like equilibrium you will have very anxious
[Guest]: moments when you well wait till you fucking get dumped then you'll know when
[Guest]: you with a tween feeling in your stomach you know up the second is I think it's
[Guest]: because of social media you know I have to check myself like I don't have the
[Guest]: Twitter app on my phone but sometimes if something happens there's a new cycle
[Guest]: when news laundry is involved I have to tell myself to stop fucking looking at
[Guest]: your phone you know you keep looking you keep looking you up kuch bolu up kuch
[Guest]: dalu up kuch karu up kuch respond karu and I've realized that causes anxiety so
[Guest]: it is not the kids fault they have grown in an age where there is this one
[Guest]: ingredient that is a standalone anxiety machine that they are growing up with
[Guest]: now that is something that a lot of kids these days face and my kids I'm talking
[Guest]: 20s even and a lot of them take very committed positions because of this
[Guest]: wanting to this you know wanting to be a part of the woke police or oh how dare
[Guest]: you like okay maybe my view on gender or yeah guys you got to understand we grew
[Guest]: up at a time when the term faggot was considered okay I mean think about that
[Guest]: it has taken some undoing I mean we grew up at a time where in our textbook there
[Guest]: was and this is a ICSC textbook where I know it's against the law to use the
[Guest]: jatav community there's a slang associated the jatav community which
[Guest]: Mayawati belongs to that slang that is associated jatav community was a part of
[Guest]: that short story in our textbook and that's what we're talking about so of
[Guest]: course a lot of my views evolved like on gender like I didn't get this whole
[Guest]: gender fluidity like I mean even now I you know a guy wearing nail varnish you
[Guest]: know I guess it may be childhood trauma because you know I mean I my my immediate
[Guest]: response I do stiffen up a little bit but I understand that's a fucked up
[Guest]: primitive response but but because you're wrong on some things you aren't
[Guest]: wrong on everything and the wokeness is like fuck we are everything in the
[Guest]: theorem it's not only mathematical theorems are mathematical theorems
[Guest]: everything else is in the graze and it'll evolve so that is something that
[Guest]: of social media where you take a very firm position and because you've taken
[Guest]: it in written it now you got to keep defending it is what leads to anxiety it
[Guest]: leads to you know I mean it will be interesting to see what this generation
[Guest]: looks like in their 40s I mean we are still dealing with the first generation
[Guest]: of social media kids I mean I think they'll be very different people from
[Guest]: pre social media like in India the pre-lib kids and the post lib kids
[Guest]: then worldwide they'll be the pre social media kids and the post social media
[Guest]: kids and I think it's gonna be a very different personality I don't know
[Guest]: whether it'll be better or worse good or bad but the impact it'll have on them is
[Guest]: enormous and at least till now I don't think overall in a good way but we may
[Guest]: be being the uncles beta ye bahut kalat cheez hai ye tv like you know if you read
[Guest]: Neil postman's amusing ourselves to death a lot of what he said was very
[Guest]: true and sensible but most of it hasn't turned out to be true so I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you but just because this is too dark a vision and one wants to though I'm
[Amit Varma]: normally the pessimist in the room but the counterpoint I'd give to this is
[Amit Varma]: that I think a lot of these people we see being performative on Twitter and
[Amit Varma]: social media are really vocal minorities it's easy to sort of fall for the
[Amit Varma]: selection bias and generalize retro this is what the young generation is like but
[Amit Varma]: I think that there's a silent majority out there I think most young people
[Amit Varma]: perhaps aren't necessarily like this but what worries me about this and about
[Amit Varma]: wokeness in particular if I am to elaborate is that with both extreme
[Amit Varma]: ideologies on all sides of the spectrum the problem I have is when you sort of
[Amit Varma]: reduce a person to their identity of birth which they had nothing to do with
[Amit Varma]: so you know on on the right side it could be that you are hated just because
[Amit Varma]: you're a Muslim and that's it that's enough and you can't love who you want
[Amit Varma]: and on the left it's again you're either an oppressor or you're a victim and once
[Amit Varma]: you are reduced to a particular thing like she said savannah once you're
[Amit Varma]: reduced to that one it shuts down conversation completely because the
[Amit Varma]: implicit message is that the content of the argument doesn't matter you know
[Amit Varma]: you're an oppressor making it and you're responsible for all oppression but the
[Amit Varma]: other aspect of it like forget the fact forget who might be at the receiving end
[Amit Varma]: of that the other aspect of it is that once you start thinking in those
[Amit Varma]: categories and I would imagine that once you take those positions you start
[Amit Varma]: thinking in those categories you become the person you pretend to be you become
[Amit Varma]: your persona in a sense then it's it's very sad because then you're thinking in
[Amit Varma]: a very limited way about people people are rich people are deep people are
[Amit Varma]: complex and you reduce them to something and you think about them like that and
[Amit Varma]: maybe you think about yourself if you think about yourself in some terms of
[Amit Varma]: victimhood that kind of prevents you like one of the things I was I have
[Amit Varma]: discussed in previous episodes is how you know there is so much talk for example
[Amit Varma]: about how the current dispensation is casteist now the thing is that more
[Amit Varma]: Dalits voted for Modi in both 2014 and 2019 than for any other party a fact
[Amit Varma]: that you know Mivani lamented in the context of Gujarat and I think what's
[Amit Varma]: happening there is that upper-class elites how Anna activists on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: will always be about oh you know Dalits are victims but Dalits across the
[Amit Varma]: country are implicitly saying with their actions that hey we are not only Dalits
[Amit Varma]: we're a lot more than that and there might be a problem with the identity
[Amit Varma]: they are asserting in its place which is a whole Hindu identity and all that
[Amit Varma]: there's also a problem with that you know but it's dangerous to think in
[Amit Varma]: terms of people as categories and that's as much a criticism about a particular
[Amit Varma]: ideology as a lament for the young people who fall into those modes of
[Amit Varma]: thinking and you work with a lot of young people which I don't on an active
[Amit Varma]: daily basis what do you see around you like when I say that these are only
[Guest]: vocal minorities or what's what's your sense in fact I was about to come to
[Guest]: that you know I think you're right statistically but because we live in
[Guest]: little bubbles in India like statistically like I said by growing up
[Guest]: you and I were not necessarily middle-class if you take exactly the
[Guest]: statistical Indian population was 60 crore in 1983 84 when I was because I
[Guest]: remember that number from a book start corrode key Abadi Valadeesh Martial so
[Guest]: we were probably in the top five or ten crores so we were definitely on
[Amit Varma]: middle-class I'd say we were the top 1% even then if we could read books yeah
[Guest]: financially but when sort of bank accounts are concerned of four G's but
[Guest]: yeah as far as when it comes which is what privilege is all about confidence
[Guest]: of no you can do it yeah because knowing who you know kind of thing is it makes a
[Guest]: difference but so statistically you may be right but the world we inhabit I'd
[Guest]: say you are not because the world that I inhabit which is the news world the
[Guest]: media space it is not a minority it is the majority now that maybe that's
[Guest]: because media is all about media and social media is important if you're in
[Guest]: media you're you know like you're on Twitter and stuff you're definitely on
[Guest]: one of it like I don't know many reporters or people who are trained to be
[Guest]: reporters who are not on Twitter so now maybe people you know artists
[Guest]: aren't maybe they're on Insta which is also social media maybe there are many
[Guest]: people who aren't and even if they are they aren't taking that position people
[Guest]: in the media space definitely are they're taking very committed hard
[Guest]: positions based on a tweet and that is a problem and I think that's a problem for
[Guest]: them because they damage themselves a lot more than who they you know lash out
[Guest]: to a troll a I think young people underestimate and I didn't and I'm not
[Guest]: saying our generation did everything great I think we fucked up a lot and
[Guest]: some of the office spaces that you worked in a deeply problematic I mean on
[Guest]: gender on the language that was used on what was okay to say what was okay to
[Amit Varma]: get away with still are from what I hear about the corporate world in the
[Guest]: advertising industry you know yeah but in news it's like moved like yeah it's
[Guest]: it's moved very significantly but on certain other things maybe the downside
[Guest]: of not you know questioning or pushing back at authority because you were asked
[Guest]: to do something you did it is because that's what we were taught right from
[Guest]: school if you know if your teacher slapped you he slapped you today you
[Guest]: know if a teacher slaps a child is gonna be very shindy at home you know when we
[Guest]: were in school I remember ribs broken yeah because of a beating you just
[Guest]: didn't complain I'm missing it's a good thing but the good thing that emerged
[Guest]: from that is that we learnt when I would join News Trek and Madhus told me to do
[Guest]: something I didn't say no mother let me tell you how to do it
[Guest]: fuck dude like I can't even think of doing that I have kids who are telling
[Guest]: me how to run my business man they come for an interview for a job and halfway
[Guest]: in they are telling me how to run news laundry which is great in a sense I
[Guest]: don't think so I think it's stupid because you haven't lived long enough to
[Guest]: know shit you may have read a lot you just don't know and not everyone's gonna
[Guest]: be patient to indulge your parents maybe patient indulge you I'm not I'm not your
[Guest]: uncle or dad or mom I want to see what you can do yeah and you cannot run a
[Guest]: business you're 20 you're 21 you're 22 if you can then go run it don't tell me
[Guest]: how to run it you don't come for a job and tell the guy how to do his
[Guest]: especially when especially when they've spoken well you've you heard them out I
[Guest]: mean they talk they don't know shit yeah that attitude that sense of confidence
[Guest]: that social media gives that leveler I think keeps them from learning I think
[Guest]: their learning curve on basic dynamics interpersonal dynamics is going to be a
[Guest]: lot longer their awareness is a lot more than ours way more they will know how
[Guest]: many states that are they will know who this chief minister every state is they
[Guest]: may know you know what is the latest bill to be tabled they would know you
[Guest]: know what happened at the climate conference but their understanding of
[Guest]: how the world operates being able to identify one car from the other is one
[Guest]: thing being able to identify how their engine works takes time so their first
[Guest]: level awareness I think is way more than ours but the second level understanding
[Guest]: is deeply compromised because of the that cocksure attitude that I know
[Guest]: everything because it's a theorem it's not a theorem only a theorem is a
[Guest]: theorem everything else is evolving I'll give you an example on this whole Dave
[Guest]: Chappelle thing my views many youngsters still tell me I didn't think there was
[Guest]: anything wrong with Dave Chappelle's I just saw the closer the last one I
[Guest]: haven't seen much was earlier work I must admit but what I've seen of his
[Guest]: which is a little bit I don't seem as homophobic or transphobic now I may be
[Guest]: wrong but I was talking to someone so how can you say that you oh my god oh
[Guest]: yeah everything oh my god yeah I said okay let's let's reason this let's start
[Guest]: off from my starting point is I understand homophobia is a thing because
[Guest]: I know I went to an all-boys school I know how horrible it was for many guys
[Guest]: who couldn't come out and it is a question of coming out man yeah I mean
[Guest]: many that's I mean it's taken them in their 40s to come out yeah because the
[Guest]: trauma of childhood doesn't go you know with bloody dormitory full of you know
[Guest]: prison rules kind of situation it I understand there's something called
[Guest]: homophobia and transphobia I understand a significant amount of people if not
[Guest]: majority have that I'm aware of that and I acknowledge that now let's come to is
[Guest]: Dave Chappelle that are you willing to start your point of view from the fact
[Guest]: that there is something called overwokenness or you know this over
[Guest]: political correctness and then is it possible that is what is leading to the
[Guest]: and and then come the dude would refuse to acknowledge that there is such a
[Guest]: thing which is why there is there is no conversation if you cannot even
[Guest]: acknowledge that there is such a thing as an overwokenness that everything is
[Guest]: this performative political correctness then dude you have decided this is a
[Guest]: mathematical theorem and you're fucked it's not my loss because I will learn
[Guest]: because I understand these are fluid things if things that are complex
[Guest]: socio-political sociological gender contextual to the society are in not
[Guest]: everybody who lived in the 1800s was evil they were good people then as many
[Guest]: as now there was trouble as many as now but slavery was a thing which was normal
[Guest]: casteism was a thing like Mangal Pandey in that film when Mangal Pandey is going
[Guest]: in the morning he's the hero Amir Khan is Mangal Pandey is the hero of the film
[Guest]: I don't know whether you remember this now the guy who's sweeping the heart
[Guest]: where he's taking a dip because Pandey ji is Janu Dhari and it was a comedy
[Guest]: sequence now I think it was a problematic thing to have that as a
[Guest]: comedy sequence in Mangal Pandey in the 2000s whenever it was made because it's
[Guest]: not cute that your hero doesn't want this you know Dalit guy's shadow to
[Guest]: follow them and he is the hero you could have made that comment in a way that was
[Guest]: sympathetic to Mangal Pandey that dude he was a product of the 1800s but it's
[Guest]: not funny it's not okay so not everybody lives them only evil they were a product
[Guest]: just like you and I a product of our times we grew up in a generation where
[Guest]: calling someone a faggot was affectionate a fag what are you doing this evening
[Guest]: yeah let's go get a drink like you can't do that today so we are now this
[Guest]: generation thinks that they've got two plus two is four and it'll be four forever
[Guest]: life is not math and I think because of social media because it is set there in
[Guest]: stone it is math I remember the first so-called back then it was a scandal the
[Guest]: whole you know gay scandal that came out in school was with much you know this
[Guest]: thing you're telling my sister of course one couldn't tell parents because my
[Guest]: parents would flip out and you know they'd probably say beta you are too so
[Guest]: tiny no one has tried anything on you you know whatever they'd flip out but my
[Guest]: sister I remember telling me that so what's the problem I said what do you
[Guest]: what's the problem dude he's a homo and she's like so you know I was what 15 or
[Guest]: 16 and she was I think in college by then she was finished college six years
[Guest]: older so yeah she must be in third year so and then she sat me down she says
[Guest]: what what makes you think that there's something wrong with that I couldn't
[Guest]: answer the question I said because I'm not so she's what's natural she's are
[Guest]: you natural you're so much tinier than everybody else are you freak then you
[Guest]: know so she sat me down she explained to me she asked me questions I didn't have
[Guest]: answers to why is it not normal I was like hey okay she says who says that
[Guest]: this is how it should be are you following some you know Veda or some
[Guest]: part Ramayan Mahabharat Lekha so then you kind of said yeah what the fuck man
[Guest]: so by the time I was in class 12 I was on most progressive kids in my class
[Guest]: because that time majority of the boys are still dude oh dude don't hey dude
[Guest]: you can't be a fag gonna shit I was like dude shut the fuck up yeah just leave
[Guest]: these guys alone and I remember you know certain guys being bullied and I was
[Guest]: like fuck dude back off and because I had friends who were you know big big
[Guest]: you know people would listen to me but it took a while to evolve and even for
[Guest]: 1991 I was more progressive than 90% of my batch and I'm still evolving I'm
[Guest]: still learning but I'm not wrong on everything dude I may be wrong on some
[Guest]: and this is a sense of self-doubt that the overwoke Gen Z doesn't have they
[Guest]: know today how it is forever and oh boy are they fucking in for a surprise when
[Guest]: they and sorry just one thing I did this one fantastic book review that he was my
[Guest]: flatmate for a while when I was in college because you know we couldn't
[Guest]: afford to for me to have a live by myself so I had because my dad is 4g
[Guest]: quota he had got you know the retired of forges or get annoyed others on colony
[Guest]: in South really there was one colony in easterly there's an ecology with all the
[Guest]: retired 4g colonies that had come up so he got a flat there so I was sharing it
[Guest]: his name is Sunil Mehra in fact he was a writer for India today an outlook and
[Guest]: one of the most gifted writers now he does this Dastan Goyi and he was one of
[Guest]: the petitioners for that 66 a 66 a world now shit everything of minus 66 a the
[Guest]: decriminalizing homosexuality which was not 66 a which was 377 66 a was that
[Guest]: information information so and I remember Tara Deshpande had come in a
[Guest]: film called it's rocky subhan and you know she was like rave reviews and she's
[Guest]: the new Smith apart till the thinking man sex bomb and gave her to Donna and she
[Guest]: was 24 and she wrote a book so an autobiography and I remember he reviewed
[Guest]: it and it was patronizing a little nasty but it was really funny and I was not
[Guest]: yet 24 and I was I think I must have been 20 21 at the time when I when he
[Guest]: was he I read it he said you know you're really smart you're really bright you're
[Guest]: really talented but you haven't lived long enough yet to write an
[Guest]: autobiography you are nothing to tell me I mean idea Ronaldo who grew up in
[Guest]: poverty and buddy became Ronaldo then in 24 you have a story but if you're a
[Guest]: middle-class kid like you and me what do you write 24 that I'd done a film and
[Guest]: that is something that I think a lot of kids need to do you just haven't lived
[Guest]: long enough yet and there is no substitute to experience and that is
[Guest]: something that I am more and more convinced as I get older yeah we're
[Amit Varma]: gonna be called uncles for saying this first of all credit to your sister for
[Amit Varma]: sitting down and having that conversation with you back in that day
[Amit Varma]: which is pretty impressive and also good that you listened because in this age of
[Amit Varma]: social media if you had already taken stances everywhere then who knows but
[Amit Varma]: like one way to figure out I should have beaten me up so one way to figure out
[Amit Varma]: how sort of open people are I think it's just to ask them that what facts would
[Amit Varma]: convince you you are wrong and if there's absolutely nothing then
[Amit Varma]: obviously it's dogmatic like you know I've gotten into scraps because you know
[Amit Varma]: when Chimamanda Adichie wrote an excellent piece on social media a while
[Amit Varma]: back I linked it and people were like hey but she's transphobic and all that
[Amit Varma]: and I was like why is she transphobic and I didn't find any of that convincing
[Amit Varma]: and one of the reasons was hey but because she defended JK Rowling and and
[Amit Varma]: I was like okay so why is Rowling transphobic because I really don't think
[Amit Varma]: she is from everything that I have read I think those are over interpretations
[Amit Varma]: and what I've realized is that when these so-called facts Rowling is
[Amit Varma]: transphobic when it almost becomes a dogmatic matter and it reminds me in
[Amit Varma]: some ways of the blasphemy law in Pakistan like in Pakistan if someone is
[Amit Varma]: charged with blasphemy you can't even say they may not have
[Amit Varma]: committed blasphemy because if they say that you will be a blasphemer yourself
[Amit Varma]: so it's not like you're defending blasphemy all you're saying is that she
[Amit Varma]: hasn't committed blasphemy but just by saying that she may not have committed
[Unknown]: it you're a blasphemer yourself so of course I got called a transphobe myself
[Amit Varma]: which is as far from the truth as it can be so let's kind of get back to the
[Amit Varma]: trajectory of a career we left off in DU where which the environment sounds like
[Amit Varma]: a lot of these young people should actually perhaps go there and get some
[Guest]: experience. Really they should I mean I tell them by something I regret often is
[Guest]: like when I flip out when I get angry which I don't get so often I used to get
[Guest]: really angry very often like I was on a hair trigger all the time and there was
[Guest]: stress I was doing a lot of things I was shooting having a plate I was like my
[Guest]: day was packed man and at that time just because you're always on edge you flip
[Guest]: out I don't do that so much but sometimes when I do I really regret it
[Guest]: later at night like which I don't carry grudges because if I carry grudges and
[Guest]: the same you know standard is applied to me a lot of people won't talk to me ever
[Guest]: because when I lose it I can say really nasty things but you know this I have
[Guest]: said often enough that you should have been in DU in the 90s and you would not
[Guest]: be so oh yeah oh yeah oh this was you know too much oh I can't deal with this
[Guest]: oh this gives me anxiety dude there till you were back home you'll always be
[Guest]: dealing with anxiety that was just the environment it was so yeah I think I
[Guest]: mean I think there is something to say about tough love yeah you can't go
[Guest]: through life not expecting to have doubt or be anxious it's not a condition it's
[Guest]: life and that's not to say I'm not denying that there is something called
[Guest]: anxiety but I just think that unless there is something deeply wrong with
[Guest]: this generation the data of people who I know who have anxiety is way more than I
[Guest]: think would be considered an acceptable level for a society to be largely
[Guest]: healthy then our society is finished. Jonathan Hayton made this great
[Amit Varma]: observation in in the context of teenage girls committing suicide more and more
[Amit Varma]: in the US and suffering from depression and there was a Facebook study which
[Amit Varma]: actually validated this which Facebook suppressed many years ago and the thesis
[Amit Varma]: was this that when the internet really started exploding people worried about
[Amit Varma]: teenage boys young boys they said that they'll play video games all the time
[Amit Varma]: and they'll be violent and all that now it turns out that that was just fine the
[Amit Varma]: boys played video games and learn problem-solving it wasn't a big deal
[Amit Varma]: they developed fine the problem happened with the girls because how girls were
[Amit Varma]: typically socialized when they're adolescent or pre-adolescent or whatever
[Amit Varma]: not my words I'm kind of paraphrasing what others have said and experts have
[Amit Varma]: said is that they're kind of hanging out together in school and that's how they
[Amit Varma]: are being social and you know all of that but what social media did was it
[Amit Varma]: pushed them into a performative space like Instagram where everybody's looking
[Amit Varma]: at best and all of that and the anxieties of having to be performative
[Amit Varma]: having to compete all the time like I think you and I had the luxury of being
[Amit Varma]: able to fall into our skins and discover a self without needing to construct it
[Amit Varma]: for ourselves to compete with everybody else's constructed selves and it's it's
[Amit Varma]: something I I feel really bad for all these people I but I hope that it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of a small minority and if you see more of them perhaps it's you know the
[Amit Varma]: self-selection of the media profession itself which might attract those people
[Amit Varma]: that's my hope I don't know but to get back to the narrative of your life so
[Amit Varma]: you've done your economics at Hansraj College and all that what are you
[Amit Varma]: looking at doing and how do you then you know end up at news track looking at
[Guest]: just surviving I mean there's certain bits that I won't go into because I'm a
[Guest]: very sure private person but a variety of things in by 95 was just through my
[Guest]: life no spin where I was kind of a drift and I would have to watch out for myself
[Guest]: or my sisters would have to watch out for what I did there was nobody else
[Guest]: really looking over what what I was up to so so my sister had a very close
[Guest]: friend Sabrina Dhawan who's now a professor at NYU she also wrote Monsoon
[Guest]: Wedding and Kamine and I think Ishqiya she's done a whole bunch of films with
[Guest]: Vishal she was a reporter with news track which was a news magazine and she
[Guest]: had known me since I was 12 and I just so you know that my sister went to
[Guest]: school they had a group of Srinivasan Jain of NDTV Vasu, Sabrina my sister and
[Guest]: there were two or three more others they were you know at Hindu College English
[Guest]: Honors gang and I was in school I was in class six or seven so when I used to come
[Guest]: to Delhi that was my first experience with DU and they were they were the nerds of you
[Guest]: know so it had the arty bunch it had the goons it had the rich kids kind of thing
[Guest]: so they were the nerds nerds so Sabrina said you know what are you doing in
[Guest]: third year college and and my sister said you know she's hardly ever goes to
[Guest]: college I know he's hanging out here there with all sorts of and I had to
[Guest]: start making a living it wasn't I mean I I had to start making money I had to
[Guest]: start fending for myself so she said why don't you come and work in news track
[Guest]: she says you write well you've already written a few book reviews for this
[Guest]: magazine while you're here come and meet my boss Madhu so I said
[Guest]: okay I was cable TV had come in so I you would either watch you know bold and
[Guest]: beautiful all those shit shows that came or watch MTV banjo macho you remember
[Guest]: those I worked in channel V and MTV for four years 94 to 99 did you know I look
[Guest]: at that do you remember that banjo macho the characters were going very vaguely
[Guest]: that would not make it on air today none of that would make it it was so funny
[Guest]: and it was hysterical and I remember this spoof of it's they had this clay
[Guest]: motion Salman Khan character and that oh oh Johnny Johnny you know that song and
[Guest]: it was like really potty humor so the Salman Khan guy laughing oh yeah yeah
[Guest]: kalka khana and he really like farts at the audience it was so stupid but so
[Guest]: funny but anyway so yeah so I went and met Madhu and Madhu was like very busy
[Guest]: like she even now I mean now she's I think 74 that time which I'm talking
[Guest]: about 95 so it's how many years ago so she'd be 50 perhaps yeah so I mean you
[Guest]: can imagine if at 74 she walks so fast like she's yeah what's your name okay
[Guest]: fine come from tomorrow we'll see news researcher so it was like a five minute
[Guest]: interview now this is what I mean by privilege I got a foot into news track
[Guest]: which had probably 30 reporters at the time I mean everyone who's heading any
[Guest]: news organization in there right now of consequence is from news track you know
[Guest]: and I got in there just because I knew Sabrina yeah so you may not be the son
[Guest]: of an industrialist but you are privileged because you can walk in and
[Guest]: get a chance now whether you want to you know fuck up that chance or not is up to
[Guest]: you but dude 99.99% will not even get that chance they won't even know that
[Guest]: chance yeah exactly so I went and one thing was that and this is what I even
[Guest]: tell I mean I may have been rebellious and often not you know I had a lot of
[Guest]: problems I wasn't I was great but I was very hard-working which is like
[Guest]: tilted laziness makes me more angry than anything else when I see a young person
[Guest]: who's working and is lazy oh man I just flip out I'm like if you fucking can't
[Guest]: work at this age when you're fucking 47 you'll be doing jack shit you're at your
[Guest]: prime I could get by like I could get by three to four days without sleeping more
[Guest]: than three hours a day yeah today of course I've got diabetes and I'm sure
[Guest]: that's one of the reasons but I can't do that really if I go without eight
[Guest]: hours of sleep for my second day I'll get a cough cold I'd be zombieing yeah
[Guest]: I know what you mean when you're young you can do that you can you know get
[Guest]: smashed you can wake up in the morning six head to office so so and we're
[Guest]: talking about pre-internet pre EVMs so I started work as a researcher there was
[Guest]: such a thing as a researcher and later in news there were no such things as
[Guest]: researchers news laundry still has people as researchers I must add I
[Guest]: actually started that what I learned from Madhu and researcher meant that you
[Guest]: didn't have the internet so let's say I remember the first story I was working on
[Guest]: was on Altaf Hussain of the MQM Mukthuhadi Qaumi movement of Pakistan so
[Guest]: of course I don't know who the fuck Altaf Hussain was so say go to the
[Guest]: Indira Day library and get me research on Altaf Hussain which research on Altaf Hussain
[Guest]: meant you took a file you wrote on that Altaf Hussain for Alpana Kishore
[Guest]: who was my you know immediate boss at the time and then Madhu was her boss
[Guest]: and you go to so competent house which is cannot place middle circle was a
[Guest]: news track office Indira Day office was a block the you know the corner office
[Guest]: and Indira Day library was in this end block only on the inner circle so you
[Guest]: went and then you know with those wheels you pull those things and those columns
[Guest]: move yeah I don't know what you call those but they're on these tracks so
[Guest]: these huge from the you know from the ground to the ceiling there these
[Guest]: cabinets and you with a wheel you can move them there like ten of them
[Guest]: stacked up so all the time magazines all the India Today magazines all the Times
[Guest]: of India newspapers they're all in these big big files like with the date right
[Guest]: from like 1980 to 82 82 to 83 83 and you just start taking them out at random and
[Guest]: looking for and looking for anything to do with Altaf Hussain and what you do
[Guest]: with a search of Altaf Hussain today and then you so you read like one
[Guest]: paragraph of the globe of everything and then say okay Altaf Hussain photocopy
[Guest]: photocopy so over like four five days you have a file that is fairly thick of
[Guest]: Altaf Hussain related articles and then you take it to the reporter he or she
[Guest]: will read that then they will determine the story of Altaf Hussain and that story
[Guest]: will be scripted there will be shoots happening over two three four days then
[Guest]: edits happening over two three days and then a story will come out which will be
[Guest]: anything from 5 to 25 minutes that's how the news was I'm so glad you sketched it
[Amit Varma]: out in detail like that because people today including me often just take the
[Amit Varma]: internet for granted that research hai toh search karo and it's like physically
[Amit Varma]: going there moving wheels columns moving taking out shit at random there's no
[Guest]: search you got everything yeah so you just take one file after the other so
[Guest]: you got like the one you see Pooja Bedi photo you know it's not Altaf Hussain
[Guest]: yeah so it's the people may be thinking so that means you read every magazine
[Guest]: no you're smart you open it if there's a cover story in Pakistan you know there
[Guest]: will be an Altaf Hussain so then you find good if the cover story is on
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi's assassination for example then you know that these pages you don't
[Guest]: even go you see okay this story is from page 29 to page 38 is Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: nothing on that page that says Pooja Bedi's photo this is not Altaf Hussain
[Guest]: tuk tuk tuk tuk tuk so that's how you go through it so sometimes you can go
[Guest]: through like 20 magazines in like 40 minutes and you're fairly accurate so
[Guest]: yeah that was how we did research and then you know within three months I was
[Guest]: you know elevated to a reporter then you start doing your own stories meanwhile
[Guest]: news track kind of died I mean it became a weekly show the cassettes were
[Guest]: phased out in fact cassettes were phased out the month I joined hmm I think a
[Guest]: month before that we were just in the last do those archives exist anywhere
[Amit Varma]: but I have the VHS tapes in my office so I want to ask you about one particular
[Amit Varma]: sorry for the digression but one particular story that imprinted itself
[Amit Varma]: on me just because it was so hilarious and so truthful which I still remember
[Amit Varma]: which would have been before your time but you might have seen it and it was
[Amit Varma]: this interview of Devi Lal where he was being asked that you know why he made
[Amit Varma]: Om Prakash Chautala the chief minister of Haryana at the time and I remember
[Amit Varma]: the angle was like he he was sort of in a banyan and dhoti and his feet were up
[Amit Varma]: on this thing in the garden and the angle was from below the shoes giant
[Amit Varma]: kids and Devi Lal in the background and the question was ki apne apne bete ko
[Amit Varma]: chief minister kyu banaya and Devi Lal said toh kya bhajanlal ke chhode ko banaya
[Amit Varma]: which I thought was a remarkable answer right it's yeah and I haven't
[Guest]: obviously found it anywhere on YouTube but if you have the tapes I have all the
[Guest]: archives so but so of course then aaj tak started as a bulletin and I remember
[Guest]: aaj tak started and here's again where I was wrong and so wrong when aaj tak
[Guest]: started people may take Hindi news as a viewership thing for granted but I mean
[Guest]: back then I think Ajit was a Punjabi paper that had a huge circulation
[Guest]: otherwise news was an English thing on television you know there was a Hindi
[Guest]: but you know news track the Hindi news track was a later thing India today was
[Guest]: a Hindi magazine there was Dharam Yuga and Saptahik Hindustan but they didn't
[Guest]: have you know the kind of sway I don't know about the numbers but I'm guessing
[Guest]: considering they didn't really rock the world and they've folded up soon India
[Guest]: today English magazine there was an Indian Hindi which was like an
[Guest]: afterthought but news was English news track then you know after news tracks
[Guest]: spectacular success eyewitness had started Karan Thapar started some
[Guest]: cassettes then there was people plus you know there was a whole bunch of them
[Guest]: came so when aaj tak started most people and you just you know observe and
[Guest]: say haan theek hi bolte hain many people were of the view that chalega kahan hai
[Guest]: Hindi people don't want news they want Govinda they want cinema so for English
[Guest]: speaking there's news for Hindi speaking there's cinema you know that was a
[Guest]: thinking and fuck how wrong everybody was and how fucking patronizing I know
[Amit Varma]: and how aaj tak exploded a news news track folded up and aaj tak became the thing
[Guest]: yeah so then I reported for aaj tak and that was a huge like kind of shock
[Guest]: because from stories being between you know 5 to 15 minutes the first phase
[Guest]: when it was it was aaj tak as a bulletin was 24 minutes because there was
[Guest]: six minutes FCT which is called free commercial time three minutes belong to
[Guest]: the government three minutes belong to the person and you know we had to finish
[Guest]: stories in 90 seconds I was like what the fuck 90 seconds is just mai samay baan raha hoon tab tak to
[Guest]: so that is what you know I don't show refer to soundbite so that we had
[Guest]: formula opening voiceover which is about you know half a page bite middle voice
[Guest]: over bite closing voiceover piece to camera done story over and that you know
[Guest]: you saw how people like SP Singh who died you know way too early and there
[Guest]: was Ajay Dada who also unfortunately died in the car accident and Naqvi Dada
[Guest]: they they knew how to tell that story quickly you know just get to the meat of
[Guest]: the story and of course there's some one of the advantages of working in the 90s
[Guest]: was that you got to cover three general elections in five years normally for
[Guest]: people who took 15 years because you know they will all they will all be wrong
[Guest]: Sitaram Kesari made that government collapse so there was one then there was
[Guest]: a hung Parliament Atal Bihari Vajpayee's 13 day government in the 13 month
[Guest]: government and another election so there was you know so you got to cover you
[Guest]: know two Lok Sabha elections very close to each other and there were really
[Guest]: funny things because that is the first time there was live happening for
[Guest]: private otherwise Doordarshan used to live so it was Aapka Faisla and which was all
[Guest]: the reporters and anchors would be India Today's which was Tavleen, Veer, Madhu and
[Guest]: who was the fourth? Karan Thapar and all the reporters would be us guys and the
[Guest]: infrastructure and the producers would be Doordarshan's and I remember there was
[Guest]: such a huge difference because in our time if you didn't get the shit done you
[Guest]: know your ass would be fucking kicked and Madhu didn't suffer fools and we
[Guest]: were working with producers so both you know there was a guy called
[Guest]: Ujhaar Singh he now I think does a show on News X he used to do a show you may
[Guest]: have seen him he used to anchor a bunch of stuff and he got LK Advani
[Guest]: like it was a fucking scoop at night LK Advani ko wale aaya hai. That time there used to be
[Guest]: these big OB vans you know now OB vans are these short truck type things that
[Guest]: also aren't used now you have a little bit the OB van was the size of a you
[Guest]: know bus inside there was all these monitors there would be the faders there
[Guest]: would be the big consoles like you know this one and it had this one master
[Guest]: switch once you switch it off you know like the old ACs you can't switch it on
[Guest]: for half an hour you have to wait half an hour and then switch it on so it was
[Guest]: dinner time and Doordarshan is Sarkari job so they said dinner time so Ujhaar said
[Guest]: bacha I've got LK Advani, Advani ji aa rahe hain, aa rahe honge, khatak he switched it off
[Guest]: oh my god and Ujhaar was like I can't get him back and these guys were like hum drink khaane jaane hain
[Guest]: yeh nahi hoga, unko leh drink ke baad hai. I'm like f**k you saw the power of a government job man you know they
[Guest]: were answerable to nobody but anyway I was I worked really hard like for the
[Guest]: time that I was there I didn't stand out for my intellect or anything but if
[Guest]: anything needed to be done which needed you to stay in office for three nights I
[Guest]: wouldn't why no no I wanted to go home one was for a lot of people that was
[Guest]: genuine this thing especially back then for girls that you know the parents
[Guest]: won't say you'll go to office on Monday come back on Thursday you f**k it's serious
[Guest]: for a lot of guys also that would be the case apne koi poochne wala tha nahi toh bhai
[Guest]: jahe main Thursday au ki Friday au ki main aungi nahi no one gave a f**k so I I worked
[Guest]: very hard for those four years from 95 to 99 but when Madhu quit which was I
[Guest]: think 96 97 I knew that I'm not gonna want to work here for very long
[Guest]: age journalism the way it was being done that time was not for me and at the back
[Guest]: of my head it was that I I had no problem with Madhu because I was very
[Guest]: young I was just 20 but as I became 22 23 that thought crystallized maybe had
[Guest]: Madhu continued to be my boss I would have happily worked I don't know but
[Guest]: when there was a change of management the whole you know office change
[Guest]: everything changed then Prashant who was also with me at News Trek we quit and we
[Guest]: started a production house called small screen in 99 and then we did a
[Guest]: documentary film which won a couple of awards so we got back then like three
[Guest]: and a half thousand dollars in award money that kept you going for a month
[Guest]: then his wife gave us some money to go month on month my sister would give us
[Guest]: something so there were two three years of struggle where I often wondered
[Guest]: because buffoons who was who were I I'm not saying I was their boss but in
[Guest]: office they would be nobody's were suddenly anchoring prime times you know
[Guest]: that is when the boom happened the mid-2000s and when Prashant you say
[Guest]: we didn't make a mistake? we'd be watching TV and say this idiot is anchoring
[Guest]: what are you doing? okay then we I don't want to take names and then someone he's become
[Guest]: managing editor I said are you fucking serious that duffer doesn't know his
[Guest]: ass from his elbow and then suddenly that time a Hyundai Accent came
[Guest]: everyone started buying Hyundai Accent I went from earning I joined at
[Guest]: three and a half thousand then I you know moved to seven thousand soon I became a
[Guest]: reporter then I went up to eleven and a half thousand when I quit which was in
[Guest]: Bombay I was posted to Bombay and Millind Khandekar was my boss at the
[Guest]: time I think now he's heading Aaj Tak and he was with ABP for a while at that
[Guest]: time sorry yeah that you know a lot of these people who we had worked with
[Guest]: would find out so from eleven thousand twelve thousand salaries at that time
[Guest]: we're talking people are getting forty forty five thousand just unheard of yeah
[Guest]: in our profession and here we had one documentary film and after that we didn't get
[Guest]: another project so we'd get a film for some hotel to do a
[Guest]: corporate film you know it was like and then you know you'd often wonder dude
[Guest]: have we made the wrong choice like you know people who are not even half as
[Guest]: smart as us or so we thought are anchoring primetime shows they are
[Guest]: wearing suits you and I are still struggling to you know buy another pair
[Guest]: of shoes but I'm glad we stuck it out I'm so glad because then when the boom
[Guest]: happened then you know we got you know one show we got election shows for some
[Guest]: Tamil child channel we got because we had the reporter's background then we
[Guest]: did a couple of travel shows in the travel boom started then you know we
[Guest]: just got high when I played became a spectacular success then Fox Traveller
[Guest]: came we did Twist of Taste with Neel Bhatia so I was so glad we stuck it out
[Guest]: because for the next seven or eight years you know now startup is a thing so
[Guest]: from just Prashant, me, Pancham and Ramakant who were our office guys and
[Guest]: Ramakant is still with us at News Laundry Pancham has retired and gone back to his
[Guest]: village in Kumaon he just retired last year so the four founders of small screen
[Guest]: were Prashant, Ramakant, Pancham and me and then without any funding we see we grew
[Guest]: from like you know four people to 54 people and it's organic growth no
[Guest]: funding you know you did a show you saved some money you hired another
[Guest]: person you did a show save some money bought an Apple G3
[Guest]: those days it was G3 then you saved some money bought a G4 hired another editor
[Guest]: and then you grew grew and then at one time there was not a travel there was
[Guest]: not a lifestyle channel in India which did not have a travel show that wasn't
[Guest]: produced for us Twist of Taste you know what's with Indian men what's Indian
[Guest]: women, Roti Raasta India, Highway on my Plate I don't even remember the names of
[Guest]: you know we had a travel show on every every channel and meanwhile there were
[Guest]: other shows we were doing we were doing small-time ad films and meanwhile I was
[Guest]: writing this show called Gustakhi Maa from the Great Indian Dimasha again I
[Guest]: remember that how did I get that a friend of mine used to work at NTV Manvi
[Guest]: Sinha she was you know at profit she was an anchor there and she was in Vellum
[Guest]: Girls she was a school captain I was at Doon and she was my mother's favorite
[Guest]: student and my mother used to keep saying that you're the Tannikamma she's
[Guest]: going for debates at the age of 14-15 you are being sent up to the headmaster
[Guest]: for indiscipline because I used to get into it. She was Sharma ji ka beta. She was Sharma ji ka beta
[Guest]: and I was the guy who was always being complained about that your son you know
[Guest]: did this and then he was rude to such and such teacher and then he was rude to such and such boy
[Guest]: and then he did this and he did that so Manvi was there and they were looking to
[Guest]: start and it was very hush-hush at the time we can't tell you too much but it's
[Guest]: political and it's funny can you do that I was like of course I can do that
[Guest]: because like stories would get rejected all the time at Aaj Tak because I would
[Guest]: you know try to add some funny element to the stories and it was Nakul and I said
[Guest]: Niku yeh kya tamashe kar rahe ho yeh news hai yeh kaisa voice ho lika I remember and I was
[Guest]: always asked to do like during election time we do political stories otherwise
[Guest]: you'd ask to do stories like go to Lodhi Garden and ask do a Vox Pop and what do
[Guest]: people feel about Bill Clinton's impeachment like why the fuck does Lodhi
[Guest]: Garden walk and give a fuck about Bill Clinton but you know or go to all the netas and ask them
[Guest]: what is the New Year resolution I remember Pranam Mukherjee going to his
[Guest]: house and that that guy also had a bungalow opposite Pranam Mukherjee that
[Guest]: you know the guy who hurt his leg in a bomb blast Bitta Bitla that Sikh guy
[Amit Varma]: yeah yeah I forget the name but I know who you are talking about and Sushma Swaraj I
[Guest]: remember you know you could just walk into the house and ask for an interview
[Amit Varma]: yeah yeah dude and they'd entertain you because NewsTrack was the only game in
[Guest]: town no one would say no to NewsTrack camera yeah so you know when I was 21 22
[Guest]: I've interviewed like Sushma Swaraj, I've interviewed Pranam Mukherjee, I've interviewed that
[Guest]: Home Minister would keep changing his outfit Patil, Pratibha Patil, no no no
[Guest]: Congress guy from Maharashtra um the Home Minister who got a lot of flack
[Guest]: when the bomb blast happened, Shivraj Patil, so I mean I've interviewed all these guys
[Guest]: because if you were an Aaj Tak on NewsTrack camera you were the biggest you
[Guest]: know game were there any memorable New Year resolutions dude everybody want to
[Guest]: write a book every this year I will write a book I was like okay so there
[Guest]: was nothing very creative I remember so it was it was exciting in that in that
[Guest]: sense and any of this so then when this happened Manvi said she called me and
[Guest]: she said you know NDTV is looking for a show where they look for a funny guy who
[Guest]: knows politics and I thought you're the guy so why don't you come and meet the
[Guest]: producer and Pranoy, I didn't get Pranoy, I was at Dosco, now this is what I mean a
[Guest]: privilege yeah as soon as you walk in you say small circles, Doon, Bachelor 92, oh really
[Guest]: Doon, Bachelor 66 you know that immediate there's a bond there so they asked me to
[Guest]: write two three scripts which were quite funny there was so much of material in
[Guest]: any case so then I wrote that show from 2003-2010 which was a daily show
[Guest]: I mean first it was a weekly and then became a daily show which is very hard
[Guest]: that taught me discipline waking up every morning at 6 after having watched
[Guest]: two or three bulletins a night before you know wait for the newspapers to come
[Guest]: see the first bulletin by 11 o'clock have three scripts ready three gags to
[Guest]: send back but because of this kida of news by now news had become you know
[Guest]: channels had started they had mushroomed all sorts of Zee, Star had started with
[Guest]: NDTV in part now it wasn't insane like it is now but it was still ridiculously
[Guest]: shrill and I remember me and Madhu would often meet in Delhi you know at because
[Guest]: I have a common friend who's very good friend of us you'd often meet at some
[Guest]: wedding or something not to say I move in Madhu's circles but I have this one
[Guest]: friend who is very friendly with Madhu whose parents are very friendly with
[Guest]: Madhu so because at that time we were all marriageable age there were three
[Guest]: quick succession marriages and Madhu was there at the marriage so was I and we
[Guest]: like dude what the fuck is happening because now I have a lot of respect for
[Guest]: them and many of them are friends of mine but many of them went through a
[Guest]: phase where they were so impressed with themselves being on TV that they became
[Guest]: like oh my god look here I am look here there's this happening and I'm here kind
[Guest]: of thing and we had done all that at News Strike you know so Madhu said we
[Guest]: should do a show that is takes apart all this so we pitched that show we took it
[Guest]: to Rajdeep who had started CNN-IBN we took it to Pranoy we took it to this one
[Guest]: who at times now he was doing Arnab it was a great idea because you know now
[Guest]: people take for granted that everyone takes potshots at each other in the mid
[Guest]: 2000s to the early 2011-12s and all there was this unspoken rule you will
[Guest]: attack everybody but not fellow media no matter what you think of them and I was
[Guest]: like who the fuck made this rule and this is when things like my sister's talk
[Guest]: who made this rule you know very early in life I was taught that is it a rule
[Guest]: of nature or is it math if it is neither of these it can be broken so I'm like
[Guest]: why the fuck can't you name each other and you know and still be friends I
[Guest]: really like this a lot about Barkha we have done searing critique of Barkha I
[Guest]: myself have criticized various aspects of us and I also really admire various
[Guest]: aspects of hers but she can take it in the jaw and move on she's a TK you
[Guest]: didn't like that TK you like this TK chalo to see when you write but she's
[Guest]: she won't sulk someone like Sagarika doesn't have that
[Guest]: quality after the eight birth but I cut the cut tea for life and most people in
[Guest]: the media were like this so I thought didn't give a fuck cuz I have very good
[Guest]: friends or not in the media so I said I don't want to be friends anyway Madhu
[Guest]: doesn't give a fuck because dude I'm your so dude so everyone said lovely
[Guest]: idea but you criticize us also we said of course you criticize you we can't be
[Guest]: on your channel and take photos but you no no no no no but you do and many say
[Guest]: no you know this is not done we shouldn't comment on media to Prashant
[Guest]: Madhu me Rupak by that time our friend had also joined small screen because he
[Guest]: had said he was in a family business he's a childhood friend of mine and he
[Guest]: said dude he's creative creative bent he says I don't want to do that you know
[Guest]: let me come on to small screen and we'll do something and it's grown ever since
[Guest]: now small screen news laundry around separately because for propriety reasons
[Guest]: you know corporate governance it's conflict of interest there hundreds of
[Guest]: things happen so we separated in 2014 and also the investor demands conditions
[Guest]: precedence you cannot sit on any other board and all that shit so you have to
[Guest]: separate everything but so Prashant said I fuck everyone y'all I'm internet
[Guest]: pitch aligned to my internet Sarah Dekta connect he says they pay an 8% to
[Guest]: dictate so by that time I was also I'm only a professional career meanwhile
[Guest]: Arvind KJ well it also happened in 2002 when I was shooting documentary then we
[Guest]: came very friendly and then we started an NGO together and stuff then when
[Guest]: this thing happened I realized the power of the internet I said Prashant you're
[Guest]: very smart let's do this on the internet so then when we said do this on the
[Guest]: internet then from one show which would was clothesline Madhu's show it became
[Guest]: Niku you do a series called I agree where you interview we'll do articles
[Guest]: we'll do cartoons we'll do comics and there was not much additional cost
[Guest]: because small screen had you know 50 employees it had you know 12 editing
[Guest]: machines it had eight directors it had you know so an additional cost for five
[Guest]: people we'd hire and we'd start it was a passion project it was Kida tha news ka
[Guest]: Kida Prashant kotha Madhu kotha mujhe tha that was the only reason news
[Guest]: started and in two three years it became a thing and one thing from the
[Guest]: beginning we were clear that it is subscribers only I had it I had you know
[Guest]: at that time and I remember discussing this Madhu figured that ads will kill
[Guest]: news and if you see in 2012 our mission statement says this I said news cannot
[Guest]: survive on ads because even though the insanity of Arnab had not happened yet
[Guest]: the whole thing of Bunty and Bubbly anchoring a show you know this was I
[Guest]: think in 2004-5 when Rani Mukherjee I was watching news I was like what the
[Guest]: fuck how can you your prime time is sacred you cannot turn this into a
[Guest]: gimmick to do Bunty and this is NDTV dude it's not like times now every channel
[Guest]: was doing Sohail Seth was a fucking toast of every show fucking talking crap
[Guest]: like I was like what the fuck what how is this news and it was just stupid
[Guest]: wasn't Arnab insanity let me repeat but the reasons for it being ridiculous for
[Guest]: different but I was like because ads because this dude will get you ads that
[Guest]: dude will get you ads no one is going to say anything about cricket because
[Guest]: cricket will get you ads so we had the luxury of not having to make a living
[Guest]: because small screen was doing amazing work so we could take that you know just
[Guest]: you could afford to be virtuous we will not take ads from the start so that was our
[Guest]: mission statement news cannot survive on ads boss either you will do TRP or
[Guest]: news because that's the nature of the beast so then and then of course once it
[Guest]: started and again but I will say that boss Madhu is you have to know her to
[Guest]: understand what an amazing person she is you know she is the kind who would not
[Guest]: even ask for a Padmashree and Padmashree givers will know better than to offer it
[Guest]: to her because she'll say other journalists have no problem taking
[Guest]: Padmashree's she would not even look at it so they know better than to give it
[Guest]: to her she was the kind of person who when we would be and I will not take
[Guest]: names here at night there was a big thing that happened in Delhi with a very
[Guest]: big name and we all knew that person is friends and so you like dude and mother
[Guest]: was in office at night mother we're gonna do this story this why are you
[Guest]: telling me go do it but you know he's friends with you know who your brother
[Guest]: your family or whatever your reporter you do the story I'll handle rest who
[Guest]: the fuck has the balls to say that today tell me and the only reason mother was
[Guest]: not considered one of the big like you know
[Guest]: Virgie's and some particular is because she's a woman Madhu was a boss who you
[Guest]: could learn so much from and because she came from such privilege she didn't give
[Guest]: a shit about consequences she said you do your job I will handle the rest from
[Guest]: VP Singh bloody threatening us to bloody banning our tape to get all sorts of
[Guest]: shit happening that's that's not your job you report she wasn't I mean the way
[Guest]: the newsroom changed when she quit was I someday I'll maybe write a book it's
[Guest]: it's dramatic how India today pre Madhu and India today post Madhu one of the
[Amit Varma]: things I've been doing in the last couple of years is looking at people's
[Amit Varma]: interviewing styles a lot part of this is kind of deliberate just to look at
[Amit Varma]: matters of the craft and how people do what they do and part of it is whenever
[Amit Varma]: I have a guest on my show I'll always watch every other interview of theirs
[Amit Varma]: that I can find just to look for material and one of the things I noticed
[Amit Varma]: was and and normally with Indian interviews I'm incredibly dismayed
[Amit Varma]: because people are interrupting all the time looking for gotcha moments staying
[Amit Varma]: at a very shallow level and you mentioned Madhu and I remember her
[Amit Varma]: interviews are always so immaculate and in particular Dinesh Thakur was on my
[Amit Varma]: show recently so while researching for him I watched Madhu's interview with
[Amit Varma]: Dinesh Thakur and I was a first one where I could just see that you know
[Amit Varma]: like I take tons of notes for my episodes from the books which I had
[Amit Varma]: already done by the time I watched that video and she used so many of the same
[Amit Varma]: quotes that I was planning to ask him about and so much of that so meticulous
[Amit Varma]: and well-organized it strikes me and I want to use that to double-click on
[Amit Varma]: something that you said earlier where perhaps being a bit modest you said in
[Amit Varma]: the 90s that you weren't particularly smart or whatever but you were a hard
[Amit Varma]: worker and that reminds me of something I read in an interview some 20 years ago
[Amit Varma]: and I mentioned this on my show but I can't figure out whose interview it is
[Amit Varma]: it's a sports person and it's not Dravid though it sounds like he would have said
[Amit Varma]: it where the person was asked about talent and he said you know what talent
[Amit Varma]: is talent is not fast twitch muscles or hand-eye coordination or any of those
[Amit Varma]: things talent is when you've been getting up every day in the morning to
[Amit Varma]: run and one day it's a Sunday and it's a holiday and you get up at 6 a.m. and
[Amit Varma]: there's a thunderstorm outside and your body is aching and you just want to
[Amit Varma]: stay in bed and you still go out and run in the rain that's talent right and one
[Amit Varma]: of the lessons that I have learned in my life is that hard work is everything
[Amit Varma]: everything you know I won't put a nuance to that hard work is the whole game like
[Amit Varma]: I remember I used to think in my 20s that oh I am so talented I am meant for
[Amit Varma]: big things and oh this guy knows nothing or whatever you know in my arrogant way
[Amit Varma]: and of course I wasn't as saliented as I thought I was then but self-delusion
[Amit Varma]: kind of helps you stick with the game and fake it till you make it and through
[Amit Varma]: life I've realized many of the people who had that natural flair for things
[Amit Varma]: for doing things didn't really get very far and the guys who got far were the
[Amit Varma]: guys who worked hard regardless of how much natural flair they must have like
[Amit Varma]: in a cricketing context I see this with someone like Virat Kohli where in the
[Amit Varma]: under 19 years if you look at him the first time he played the IPL it was like
[Amit Varma]: such a limited player, he can play a square of the wicket, he has his areas but so
[Amit Varma]: limited and then I think he went on to become a finest batsman right even if
[Amit Varma]: he's better in some formats than others and it's hard work it's work ethic it's
[Amit Varma]: purely that and you've earlier mentioned about you've described your own work
[Amit Varma]: ethic and at the same time you've spoken about how young people today feel so
[Amit Varma]: entitled that they're not putting in that work they're not putting in at
[Amit Varma]: hours and that process is so important equally another thing that I kind of
[Amit Varma]: talk to my writing students about and try to kind of drive home is that
[Amit Varma]: getting it done is more important than getting it right there's always a
[Amit Varma]: trade-off between these right but the only way to get it right is to get it
[Amit Varma]: done again and again and again and again and iteration leads to excellence like
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken about how you wrote Gussaki Ma for what those seven
[Amit Varma]: eight years and that every fucking day waking up in the morning and every
[Guest]: fucking day yeah and and and has to be funny and I know 50% of them weren't
[Amit Varma]: funny at all yeah 30 moderately funny 20 really funny I know that but you have to
[Amit Varma]: get it done you have to get it done and and chances are that just getting it
[Amit Varma]: done meant your funniest ones were way funnier than someone who you know just
[Amit Varma]: spent four years writing one thing because that iteration is what makes it
[Amit Varma]: good which makes a lot of good habits reflexive which eventually over time
[Amit Varma]: makes it easy tell me a little bit about work ethic and what you said about Madhu
[Amit Varma]: reminded me of that because what I remember from her interview of Dinesh
[Amit Varma]: Thakur is that this is so bloody good you look at all these other jokers and
[Guest]: she's put in the work at her age and Madhu this is and something I used to
[Guest]: get really frustrated that this person is ready for an interview she says get
[Guest]: me his book I need to read the book I said we don't have time to read the book
[Guest]: she said I'm not going to do the interview he said he's he's giving it
[Guest]: tomorrow morning okay I'll read the book through the night she will not do an
[Guest]: interview unless she's read the book I'm like dude like just no she'll stay up
[Guest]: all night she'll read the book about the work ethic one thing I will I will agree
[Guest]: with you that it is hard work but unless it's something like cricket I can't
[Guest]: what's the word overstate or understate access is so important of course I mean
[Guest]: the luck is luck is a big part of the game but once you get lucky yeah once
[Guest]: you get lucky it's yeah I mean getting a foot in even if you are not wealthy
[Guest]: yourself being in a circle where you can get access to an office where you have a
[Guest]: chance to prove yourself is extremely important I'm sure there are thousands
[Guest]: out there who are smarter than me more hard-working than me they just haven't
[Guest]: had the chance they don't know Madhu they didn't know Sabrina who took them
[Guest]: into Madhu's office like I got to work on monsoon wedding as a camera assistant
[Guest]: I was wrangling cable but I knew dude and that was hard work dude like you
[Guest]: know I remember the first day of the set the first scene we were shooting was
[Guest]: Naseer at the golf course asking the other guy for money I don't know if you've seen
[Amit Varma]: monsoon wedding there's a lovely film one of my favorite and that last scene
[Guest]: of that day was PK Dubey in Chandni Chowk Jama Masjid with his mother and in the
[Guest]: middle we had one scene at Habitat and we were shooting like fucking like two
[Guest]: three scenes a day and back in the nine you know this was what 99 2000 2000 it
[Guest]: was not I mean Sanjana and Bhansali would shoot one scene in three four days
[Guest]: we were shooting three four scenes in a day so it was like really hard work but
[Guest]: I got that chance for Sabrina was writing the film she's I'm coming to
[Guest]: Delhi she just finished her course in Columbia Meera is making a film it's a
[Guest]: small film we don't know if it'll get to anything when you come you'll get to
[Guest]: learn something I got a chance to work with Meera Nair on monsoon wedding it
[Guest]: fucking went you know to win the Golden Lion at Venice Venice correct now when
[Guest]: it comes to the work ethic let me tell you and I will say I've been very lucky
[Guest]: in life I have been extremely lucky and extremely fortunate which is why my
[Guest]: default setting is to like people not dislike them because in all my life
[Guest]: people have been good to me for no reason they had no reason that they had
[Guest]: nothing to gain from me but they've been very good to me now when I was I was
[Guest]: trying to quit as the cause I was like dude I can't so I'm not gonna call me
[Guest]: says Nicco to my Bombay John O'Connor I'm to my film cinema Karo Tom coach
[Guest]: creative karo yeh karo when I do a freaky ticket military Bombay my friend
[Guest]: Govind was engaged to make knuckles are which was our subs daughter but in a
[Guest]: TK we'll hang out with him for a while so I went I said go when I'm coming
[Guest]: there my salary was 1112 thousand rupees I'll need to get a PG but for a few days
[Guest]: can I come and stay with Babuji school goes are supposed to come so she's a
[Guest]: very large hearted man so imagine struggling staying at was our subs
[Guest]: bungalow and Pali Hill of course when I was outside the bungalow I was in armpits
[Guest]: in the church gate and then ready going to the other for a story coming back
[Guest]: coming but once I was in Pali Hill then I was now that is a privilege that how
[Guest]: many people have so I could be in Bombay for whatever two months or whatever with
[Guest]: and then when I got that you don't give my resignation three four desire a poor
[Guest]: million said the cool to me yeah I carry cow gamma 99 do with you I was planning
[Guest]: to resign but I thought let's go to Bombay and like work there for a month
[Guest]: or two then resign when I was there and oh by the way so that I've told the
[Guest]: story when Babuji had come for media rumble so on my sixth day I had seen a
[Guest]: PG in Andheri or it was even further than Andheri I think maybe a little
[Guest]: between Andheri and Jogeshwari maybe and back then the Churchgate film the thing
[Guest]: used to end at Malad or something and now to apparently now I went to Bombay
[Guest]: of course you don't travel in trains but just for old time's sake I said you know
[Guest]: I used to fucking do this every day and it was and for a Delhi kid it's because
[Guest]: here dude it was still not as bad Bombay the struggle of you don't have to ride
[Guest]: metros now the train and then you get out and you stand in line for an auto at
[Guest]: bloody Andheri and 5 rupees sharing Nariman Point office so
[Guest]: Bombay was very hard and I'm I've played sport you know throughout my life so in
[Guest]: Delhi I used to play at Siri Fort, Bombay bloody either you are working or you're
[Guest]: part there's no sport so I was very unhappy in Bombay and then I went and
[Guest]: worked with Meghna on a film Filhal so I was there for a year which I couldn't
[Guest]: hack Bombay but on the sixth day I said Babuji, I have found a place, thank you so
[Guest]: much for your hospitality, he was like Neku's you know he has a deep voice
[Guest]: Agar iss ghar se apne luggage ke saath bahar nikhle main aapki taange thod doonga as long as
[Guest]: you're in Bombay this is your home I was like fuck man like you know who makes
[Guest]: that offer I was like Babuji that's very kind of you because he lives alone
[Guest]: you know Rakhi lives in, that time she used to live in Khar and Meghna lived with Rakhi
[Guest]: so he had a bungalow on Pali Hill and Boski's room which was the room he gave
[Guest]: me I was like dude that's very kind of you but seriously yeah he says two
[Guest]: months six months here you want to stay you just you're not leaving and so when
[Guest]: I was in Bombay which was you know first stint with Aaj Tak, second stint with Meghna
[Guest]: so in the evening you know Tabu's coming for dinner that time this guy was making
[Guest]: that mehboob mere mehboob what was that film Fair Karachi editor tha Khalid
[Guest]: Fiza he was making he would come because Babuji was writing the lyrics to that so
[Guest]: you get to just sit and observe man that this is how the best work and he told me
[Guest]: one day I was like Babuji you're frozen and he writes in Urdu with the book and I said
[Guest]: what are you working on because Fiza's lyrics are done, the songs are recorded
[Guest]: he said I'm writing I said what he said how does it matter what I'm a writer so
[Guest]: I write for four hours a day I was like what he says anything but I write he
[Guest]: says too many people are writers but they don't write I was like fuck even
[Guest]: Gulzar just writes and 80% of what he writes is not gonna he has these books
[Guest]: he just writes and reads and writes and reads and writes he says if you're a
[Guest]: writer you sit every morning and just write till lunch then after lunch you
[Guest]: read then in the evening write some more and at night when he's watching and he
[Guest]: like he has this easy chair and he watches the TV on mute and reads the ticker
[Guest]: and you're saying what nonsense is this and this is before it had gone insane
[Guest]: and then he has a book he'd pick up something and write so you know I got to
[Guest]: learn from him I got to learn from Mira, I got to learn from Sabrina, I got to learn from Madhu
[Guest]: I got to learn from the fucking best yeah so I had to be above average you
[Guest]: see even if I was a dumb fuck you just have access to people who are just the
[Guest]: best at their game and we're all working hard I mean that seems to be the common
[Guest]: thread and that is when I realized so many people I know you know they roll
[Guest]: these joints I'm working on a film I'm a writer and filmmaker
[Guest]: we're all going to be 50 years old by the time we make a film
[Guest]: because people like Gulzar didn't learn this boss you can't be smoking pot for six
[Guest]: days and write for one you're fucking right for all seven days even the best
[Guest]: do that and so you know I just got and then when you know you got to learn so
[Guest]: much you got you saw such ridiculous things you saw the hollowness of a lot
[Guest]: of Bollywood you saw the shallowness of a lot of Bollywood you got but you got
[Guest]: to see what made who happy and you learned and you know I I learned from
[Guest]: Arvind in 2002 when we didn't have any work Prashanth and I we'd make
[Guest]: documentary films which we were making no money on
[Guest]: ken waisey apni kaunsi dukaan chal rahi thi toh kuch seekhi leta hai toh there is this guy called Rajender Singh
[Guest]: called the water man of India I don't know if you're familiar with him I guess I say what he
[Guest]: he has a water conference I used to I don't know if he still does in his
[Guest]: village in Rajasthan called Bikampura so he was setting up something called the
[Guest]: Jal Bhagirathi foundation with Gaj Singh and if you go to Alwar he's turned that
[Guest]: whole place through water harvesting into like a green belt like there's this
[Guest]: patch in Rajasthan which is like green it's not a desert so he was you know
[Guest]: back in early 2002 was a big name he said okay and water was of great
[Guest]: interest to us because Sheila Dixit was privatizing the Delhi water supply back
[Guest]: then and I was ideologically opposed to it so I said let's go to his conference
[Guest]: that season there I saw Arvind speak he had just quit his job with IT and I was
[Guest]: very impressed with his speech with his life story so we met and we spoke and he
[Guest]: came back to Delhi I came back to Delhi and then Prashanth met him at another
[Guest]: water talk in Habitat and he got him back to office now Arvind had no you
[Guest]: know money neither did I he needed films for his RTI work and other you know
[Guest]: entire I had an editing system and skills he said I can't pay you I said
[Guest]: chalo theek hai seekhi lenge there's another thing that I tell people not
[Guest]: everything need be about money you will learn something you will if you see an
[Guest]: opportunity take it to walk away if you don't think you're learning anything but
[Guest]: it's not always about the money so then I started Rogan Parivartan was like a
[Guest]: 10-man organization men man and women there was you know Santosh was there who
[Guest]: unfortunately died before the first election and then we did a couple of
[Guest]: campaigns together RTI campaigns and by that time I had started writing
[Guest]: Gustav Khema for NDTV so I had a kind of holdover media I knew people in the
[Guest]: media because many of my former colleagues were at prominent channels
[Guest]: in senior places so we did a campaign on RTI we partnered with like 53 news
[Guest]: organizations across the country every newspaper and I remember that time so
[Guest]: many people were so forthcoming you could walk into HD I walked into Veer's office
[Guest]: and I was like will you be part of it yeah we'll be part of it and Ram gave me time
[Guest]: will you be part of it yeah Pranoik you know came on board everyone came on
[Guest]: board yeah every newspaper came on board and then he won the maxis in 2004 or 5
[Guest]: and by then Manisha and I had become good friends and with that money he
[Guest]: found PCRF which then you know once the RTI amendments you know I spent a night
[Guest]: in Tughlaq Road police station because we were protesting in 2006 against the
[Guest]: that file notings and stuff they will not be there so that time I got I
[Guest]: learned so much from Aruna Roy, Shekhar Singh, Prashant I saw how these guys
[Guest]: work like I had seen Gulzar work now Gulzar is not a materialistic man he's
[Guest]: not hungry for fame but he's famous he takes for granted when you go to a
[Guest]: restaurant with him it comes to a standstill so I could get that even the
[Guest]: humblest of people will write because this is who I am with you know from
[Guest]: someone like Madhu you learn you know you have more than enough money you're
[Guest]: just you know working because it excites you but there's no real
[Guest]: then you meet people like Arvind and Aruna who are not
[Guest]: exactly well to do but they're working like where will this lead to like what
[Guest]: will happen like how will you where do you see yourself in 10 years if you ask
[Guest]: them like will you still be able to afford a college you know like what the
[Guest]: fuck are you doing then you learn something from people like that so then
[Guest]: he set that up with the Max's award money then of course the whole RTI
[Guest]: movement like he was like okay RTIs are coming out the whole that sports events
[Guest]: Kalmadi's event in Delhi what is it called the Commonwealth Games that
[Guest]: whole yeah RTI say we've taken out the information that each toilet paper
[Guest]: was bought for 180 rupees per roll which is for like 20 rupees or you know the
[Guest]: balloon was bought for 13 crore which is only going to use once there was a lot
[Guest]: of corruption in those but now what there's no prosecution happening so that
[Guest]: is when his frustration led him to like Jan Lokpal has to be there like just
[Guest]: getting the information out is not enough someone has to use our information
[Guest]: to prosecute these guys and CVC can't do it because CVC will tell suppose you
[Guest]: know whatever department you in the CVC doesn't do an investigation it tells you
[Guest]: to appoint a person to investigate your own department so that's a conviction
[Guest]: rates of corruption are so low so I I learned a lot about the the thinking on
[Guest]: governance how he had figured out governance at a level where I hadn't
[Guest]: encountered any and I had spoken a lot of people like in fact when I was
[Guest]: reporting the second election 99 election in I was in Ahmedabad and
[Guest]: present Commissioner election the Information Commissioner Uday Mahurkar
[Guest]: he was on radio correspondent he's now written that book on I think Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: and he's one of Modi's he didn't know book on Modi also I think I'm a
[Guest]: mistaken maybe no he must have because he so in fact he was the entire day
[Guest]: correspondent there so he had called me over for lunch and he had told me he
[Guest]: gifted me a book on Savarkar back then he was aghast that I didn't know much
[Guest]: about Savarkar so what kind of school is doing school if you don't even know
[Guest]: anything about Savarkar but back then we could still sit have lunch disagree we
[Guest]: weren't enemies today I don't think you know me and Mr. Mahurkar can sit and
[Guest]: have that conversation but what are they talking about that yeah so I had you
[Guest]: know I the way Arvind had broken on governance or something that I was like
[Guest]: okay well and I really liked him and I I found him very sincere and I found his
[Guest]: choices very hard and when he had actually said that we will block the RTI
[Guest]: amendments that's when I realized that this guy has skills which which
[Guest]: basically are audacity so I still remember we were sitting in Sundar Nagri
[Guest]: that's where the Parivartan office used to be Sundar Nagri is you know slum
[Guest]: resettlement and he has one little room there he used to work in that slum on
[Guest]: RTI and stuff it must have been about 2003-2004 it must have been and this
[Guest]: before he got the magsaysay board and he said that Manmohan Singh is oh
[Guest]: yeah it had to be 2004 passed because Manmohan Singh was PM by now they're
[Guest]: gonna be amending the RTI act file noting will be taken out in a certain
[Guest]: punitive thing he says if they I mean that's the end of the act and it's taken
[Guest]: us so long there's a lot of lobbying done by you know Aruna and everyone to
[Guest]: get it through as a national act although it was it existed in Delhi and
[Guest]: Maharashtra and Rajasthan as a national act of Parliament it only came once the
[Guest]: UPA came in I was like you know Manmohan and his bureaucrats want to kill this
[Guest]: act so I said shit yeah he says we'll block it I was like sorry he says we'll
[Guest]: stop the amendments I said you and like eight of us little lalloos here out of
[Guest]: whom I'm the only one who's a regular source of income even though it's not
[Guest]: great he says why can't we do it? who all do you know? I said I know this one I know
[Guest]: that one let's talk to Arunaji let's talk to Prashant let's do this let's
[Guest]: dude in fucking two months he had blocked the fucking amendments here and
[Guest]: that's when I said dude this guy is fucking insane he will aim for something
[Guest]: so big which seems impossible but he will work night and day he'll sleep two
[Guest]: hours he won't go back home he took a little
[Guest]: Kholi in Sundar Nagri he used to live in that slum and I always used to wonder
[Guest]: dude how does your wife like deal with you yeah so I I saw that and I remember
[Guest]: I had written this in Times of India they had asked me for a column you know
[Guest]: as just someone as a fellow traveler when he became chief minister for the
[Guest]: first time he asked me once you want to go for a weekend you want to come I'm
[Guest]: going to Maharashtra it's a nice hill station Mull I said okay chalo let's see
[Guest]: I'll get we bloody got to Mull he wanted to go there study a lady who had run a
[Guest]: in Maharashtra she was running a trade union and she had been very effective
[Guest]: at getting the tribal lands back from mining that had been given so she like
[Guest]: she ran that place like fucking dawn she had of course she wasn't doing anything
[Guest]: bad but she had managed to retrieve land that in no one in the country had been
[Guest]: able to get back from industrialist so we were bloody and we've got there we
[Guest]: stayed in some guest house so there were rats like roaming around me so once I
[Guest]: was there I was there I was like dude seriously you've got me for this what
[Guest]: would haha he have you learn because after that I never went anywhere with
[Guest]: him because it was a nightmare two days because okay I may not be you know the
[Guest]: Prince of Wales but that's what my idea of a holiday dude I can't I can't deal
[Guest]: with that shit so so from him I learned a different skill you know that don't
[Guest]: think that it's too big a task just start doing it you'll get it and I
[Guest]: remember and this is something that many people have I remember I've been on
[Guest]: panels back then because I was in the face of you know PCRF it had three
[Guest]: trustees Arvind, Manish and me and whenever Anna would say we want to come to Delhi
[Guest]: I'm like dude who will buy the air ticket money is not money so half the
[Guest]: time getting donations you know because Arvind and Manish were busy either at Ramle
[Guest]: so I was sending the cheques I remember someone telling me this has all been
[Guest]: funded by XYZ or so and so I was like really who told you they are senior
[Guest]: journalists what we call senior we know son you don't know anything I
[Guest]: think I signed the fucking cheques and anything goes like like I mean I can
[Guest]: tell you one lot who gave us a lot of support without them was Sri Sri Ravishankar's
[Guest]: team they were resource rich they had a team for wonderful people I really like
[Guest]: them personally I don't agree with a lot of what Sri Sri does and he's become
[Guest]: very different but all those people were really nice people I mean they were
[Guest]: really gently sweet you could say some very horrible offensive things to them
[Guest]: that's a no no no we don't agree but they will not hate you for it but other
[Guest]: than his team there was you know it was not funded by any industrialist or RSS
[Guest]: or anything I remember we used to go around each other collecting money
[Guest]: we used to say we want to go to Maharashtra we have to buy the air ticket
[Guest]: and throughout he was like I don't want to I said you should contest election
[Guest]: because I remember I've been with him in Digvijay Singh's house when we were
[Guest]: doing an RTI thing because it was internal you know all the yes men of
[Guest]: Manmohan or Sonia wanted to undercut so-and-so so and Arvind had become a
[Guest]: prominent RT activist he had chances to get anyone would have given a ticket
[Guest]: yeah he would have won from Sundar Nagri hands down and as you keep saying as a
[Guest]: disjoint politics if you want such a kida no no no no no this is not what we
[Guest]: do and I remember I said I mean I don't know if I should say this I had a huge
[Guest]: argument with him once that he never used to vote I was like you want to
[Guest]: change I said this is and I remember and he reasoned it with me is how many RTI's
[Guest]: have you filed in your life I said none is I filed about 500 is your one vote
[Guest]: every five years more valuable is my involvement in democracy more valuable
[Guest]: holding them accountable says vote vote what to do waste of time now of course he
[Guest]: wants that vote you see but but you know people change they evolve they you know
[Guest]: you agree you disagree but I have by accidents of meeting people and you know
[Guest]: some I knew because of who I knew sometimes I was I've just been able to
[Guest]: learn from people who have you may like them you may hate them but they have
[Guest]: pulled off shit that is fucking unbelievable and I think for that that's
[Guest]: a privilege that is pure luck there are people way more talented way smarter way
[Guest]: more hard-working who just haven't had that love or access so I want to double
[Amit Varma]: click on a bunch of things here and like after the break we will talk about
[Amit Varma]: politics of course and we will talk about media which are the two big themes
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk to you about but before we go into the break like an observation
[Amit Varma]: and a story and observation is like here you've pointed out what is common to all
[Amit Varma]: of these guys like you know I've been saying that doesn't matter how big the
[Amit Varma]: goal is just start doing it or Gulzar sub just writing for four hours every
[Amit Varma]: day and you know I I've often thought that I meet two kinds of writers you
[Amit Varma]: know and one kind of writer is someone who's in love with the idea of being a
[Amit Varma]: writer keep my writer whom I award you Tunga all of those things and the other
[Amit Varma]: kind of writer just wants to write whether they see themselves as writers
[Amit Varma]: necessarily or not and I've always said that what is important like like one
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment I kind of unleash on my writing students in my last webinar
[Amit Varma]: with them is put a hundred people in a room and there are hundred writers right
[Amit Varma]: and they range from excellent writers to good writers to mediocre to bad to up
[Amit Varma]: India writers whatever you've got the whole spectrum I had to throw that in
[Amit Varma]: there I knew you'd love so so you have that whole spectrum of writers out there
[Amit Varma]: and you ask them what their goals are and you won't know the difference
[Amit Varma]: between them because they'll all have great goals you know in the Donald
[Amit Varma]: Trump's words in all caps I have my goals are the best but you ask them what
[Amit Varma]: their processes are and you will immediately know who are the great
[Amit Varma]: writers and who are the shit writers because processes matter just that
[Amit Varma]: notion of Gulzar Saab entering his writing gym every day writing for hours
[Amit Varma]: every day which means that when he actually gets a specific thing or when
[Amit Varma]: he's actually writing for a specific goal it is likely to be so so so much
[Amit Varma]: better than it would otherwise have been which is inspiring another story I want
[Amit Varma]: to throw out there like I agree with everything you said about privilege and
[Amit Varma]: luck you and I neither of us would be sitting here if not for having got
[Amit Varma]: basically won the lottery of life again and again and again right what makes me
[Amit Varma]: really hopeful about these current times is that I see young creators who are
[Amit Varma]: beginning to transcend these barriers of you know privilege and luck and all of
[Amit Varma]: that and one person who's impressed me particularly is have you heard of
[Amit Varma]: Mohammed Salim Khan no okay so Mohammed Salim Khan is known as MSK and he's a
[Amit Varma]: vlogger I've been watching a lot of vlogs on YouTube and toying with the
[Amit Varma]: idea of starting one myself he was born in a village in West Bengal and his
[Amit Varma]: family kind of came to Mumbai when they were very young and they lived in a
[Amit Varma]: chawl somewhere extremely poor and he told the story during a talk which I'll
[Amit Varma]: also link but I found I find it very inspiring and the opposite of kind of
[Amit Varma]: privilege so he's in this chawl in Mumbai with his family and when he's 16
[Amit Varma]: or 17 I think when he's in his teens he his mother his siblings they go back to
[Amit Varma]: the village and then they get a phone call saying your father's gone mad so
[Amit Varma]: literally mad so come back to Bombay so they go back to Mumbai and they find
[Amit Varma]: that all the belongings in the house are outside the house in in that chawl and
[Amit Varma]: the father's alone inside the house and he's lost it but they take him for
[Amit Varma]: treatment and they managed to get him treated and after he's treated his
[Amit Varma]: mother asked his father that you remember we used to have this trunk
[Amit Varma]: where we had saved up everything that we had over 15 years all our savings were
[Amit Varma]: in there do you remember where the trunk is and he says so I was in an auto and
[Amit Varma]: the guy asked me for change and I didn't have change so I gave him the trunk so
[Amit Varma]: they basically lost everything right and this kid is 15 or 16 MSK and at this
[Amit Varma]: point in time he decides two things he says one I will buy my parents a house
[Amit Varma]: in Bombay and two because he is a young teenager I will have this particular
[Amit Varma]: super bike that I would really like to ride and he does it all and he does it
[Amit Varma]: all by being a creator in today's economy so he's got a vlog which I link
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes and again same work ethic working damn hard like one of his
[Amit Varma]: vlogging ethics is that every day there are days when he's
[Amit Varma]: traveling when he's put out three videos in a day which is not trivial you would
[Amit Varma]: know and is kind of done that so that's inspiring now that's obviously it's
[Amit Varma]: something that's had starting to happen recently privilege and access and those
[Amit Varma]: things still matter for a hell of a lot these people like us who are visible and
[Amit Varma]: have the kind of chances that we do but I just that's if there is one thing that
[Amit Varma]: kind of makes me hopeful in these sort of dark times it is that technology is
[Guest]: empowering people absolutely there's no doubt dude I'm in court against India
[Guest]: today yeah someone who had hired me as a reporter and I remember you know back
[Guest]: then Kali you know would often be in office I mean I guess she was working on
[Guest]: something or the other I mean I am up against a company that I could not even
[Guest]: think of like if AP would walk in we'd all stand up you know yeah of course and
[Guest]: that's because the internet I don't have to buy a buddy you know three crore
[Guest]: license have hundred crores to you don't have done a newsroom of course there's
[Guest]: no doubt about that though I still think that what technology has done for
[Guest]: influencers is good and bad because and this is something one of my favorite
[Guest]: comedians has said often in his rant that you know you ask any youngsters
[Guest]: today he was quoting some research that they did in the US some like insane 50
[Guest]: 60 percent people what do you want to be as a profession an influencer he's like
[Guest]: dude this generation is fucked if like over half of them want to be influencers
[Amit Varma]: that is their ambition that is their goal we're done was it Vahal who came up
[Amit Varma]: with that phrase about being famous for being famous
[Amit Varma]: was it I don't know I don't know who came up with it I know I think that is I
[Guest]: think that was a post-war whole thing I think that was someone observed that
[Guest]: were Kardashians Kardashians as I've been told I remember this from before
[Amit Varma]: actually famous for being famous but whatever could have been McLuhan also I
[Amit Varma]: don't know so let's take a quick commercial break and on the other side
[Amit Varma]: of the break we shall talk about politics and activism and of course the
[Amit Varma]: media do you want to read more I've put in a lot of work in recent years in
[Amit Varma]: building a reading habit this means that I read more books but I also read more
[Amit Varma]: long-form articles and essays there's a world of knowledge available through the
[Amit Varma]: internet but the problem we all face is how do we navigate this knowledge how do
[Amit Varma]: we know what to read how do we put the right incentives in place well I
[Amit Varma]: discovered one way a couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called
[Amit Varma]: CTQ compounds at CTQ compounds comm which aims to help people up level
[Amit Varma]: themselves by reading more a few months ago I signed up for one of their
[Amit Varma]: programs called the daily reader every day for six months they sent me a long
[Amit Varma]: form article to read the subjects covered went from machine learning to
[Amit Varma]: mythology to mental models and marmalade this helped me build a habit of reading
[Amit Varma]: at the end of every day I understood the world a little better than I did before
[Amit Varma]: so if you want to build your reading habit head on over to CTQ compounds and
[Amit Varma]: check out their daily reader new batches start every month they also have a great
[Amit Varma]: program called future stack which helps you stay up to date with ideas skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future future stack
[Amit Varma]: batches start every Saturday also check out their social capital compound which
[Amit Varma]: helps you master social media what's more you get a discount of a whopping
[Amit Varma]: 2,500 rupees 2,500 if you use the discount code unseen so head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ compounds at CTQ compounds comm and use the code unseen up level yourself
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Avinanthan Sekri about
[Amit Varma]: about a lot of things so let's I'm also I'm very curious about the activism bit
[Amit Varma]: because it seems at one level to be fueled by an idealism that one doesn't
[Amit Varma]: always expect from journalists say or people who are you know in the media and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth and before we get to the activism per se I'm curious about
[Amit Varma]: your conception of journalism like in a sense you said you were an accidental
[Amit Varma]: journalist you joined news track at at what point do you actually start
[Amit Varma]: thinking about what is journalism what is its purpose are there any higher
[Amit Varma]: ideals involved I mean obviously working with people like the people you worked
[Amit Varma]: with may have you know makes a difference to that but how do you kind
[Amit Varma]: of formulate what what is good journalism what is bad journalism and
[Amit Varma]: where is this good journalism and bad journalism to be defined apart from the
[Guest]: craft see I often say that I don't call myself a journalist I have often
[Guest]: corrected people at you know events I'm introduced as you know so I'm not a
[Guest]: journalist call me a news professional or an entrepreneur because the word
[Guest]: journalist suggests reporting for me that's important and I haven't done any
[Guest]: reporting in years and years I mean I may have done one story for news laundry
[Guest]: which was more just googling figuring out putting two and two together and
[Guest]: writing you know a piece on that when I was a news track I did some journalism
[Guest]: yes during election you were expected to do get some do some reading up ask
[Guest]: questions you know put some kind of story together we did a series in the
[Guest]: run-up to I think there was an election 97 was there an election 97 or 96 I mean
[Guest]: run up to that election we did a series in partnership with BBC where I think
[Guest]: of the BBC her name was Nisha Pillay or Nina Nisha Pillay she had come down the
[Guest]: producer that come down sooner putting that together I was part of the
[Guest]: production team although I've heard in reporters role but because I could go
[Guest]: nights I was always said okay you put this together so I was involved in the
[Guest]: production of that so for me good journalism should have the following it
[Guest]: it but this is a list of things that it should have it could have more a the
[Guest]: facts must be vetted and accurate to there must be a context to the story it
[Guest]: cannot be a standalone story they must you must lay the world that the story
[Guest]: exists in and this is as far as the information that you're giving to the
[Guest]: audience is concerned you must put as many sides of the story of the facts I'm
[Guest]: not saying it has to be a monkey balancing but you can't say that this
[Guest]: one is corrupt you have to have and this is something that we've you know a lot
[Guest]: of activist organizations have wanted to partner with News Laundry to do reports
[Guest]: and I know they mean well but they send us a report a video report where five
[Guest]: people have accused the SDM of corruption as have you asked the SDM no
[Guest]: have you sent an email no can you only day after tomorrow because it's so far
[Guest]: from village you know like there's a lot of organization grassroots organization
[Guest]: and there you know correspondents are just the village folk they can't go 40
[Guest]: kilometers tomorrow to get a bite yeah they forgo a day's salary now and I
[Guest]: really want to work with them but journalistically that is not a story I
[Guest]: can put out no matter how much I agree with them and their cause because you
[Guest]: got to ask the guy are there any other sides to it to it has to be relevant you
[Guest]: know to the the choice of story has to be and has to be some purposes choice of
[Guest]: economy by could be I mean it may have these things but it's not it's not so
[Guest]: that is good journalism but most importantly when do you stove story
[Guest]: about what now if today someone is to ask me is the story of road being
[Guest]: blocked in Mahim Junction Mahim Bombay because of the Mars a story or not yeah
[Guest]: it's a story is it the story that I should today no and it is not because
[Guest]: you want to hide one thing it is the story on Kalmadi's corruption let's say
[Guest]: I get one more you know Kalmadi corruption has been done but so you get
[Guest]: one more angle give a heavy water man I got he kept but it is journalism but
[Guest]: it's not good journalism is that relevant today your journalist when you
[Guest]: say it's the first draft of history vallage of cliche hair the way it has to
[Guest]: be relevant for today now and it has to be fueled by a sense of wanting to make
[Guest]: things better that has to be the purpose now that why someone does something is
[Guest]: going to be very vague and very broad and very but for me when I'm hiring
[Guest]: for news laundry and I'm not saying there's no room for that other kind of
[Guest]: journalism I just do it because I'm good at it I'm smart I have access to so-and-so
[Guest]: but then maybe news on is not the place for you because what I consider good
[Guest]: journalism is you are doing it from a sense of curiosity because you want to
[Guest]: make things better and that is to me more or less what what good journalism
[Guest]: should should have can have other stuff but it should have these things so you
[Amit Varma]: know we come to politics later because now that we started talking about
[Amit Varma]: journalism and I thought we'll go from sort of where that idealism developed to
[Amit Varma]: activism and that seemed like a natural segue but let's talk about the media for
[Amit Varma]: a while and we'll come back to politics it and I'll push back mildly on a couple
[Amit Varma]: of these things because I think this conception of journalism that you kind
[Amit Varma]: of spoke about is relatively recent you could even say that it started say with
[Amit Varma]: Walter Lippmann's book public opinion in I think 1910 1911 and all of that and
[Amit Varma]: gradually evolved over a period of time from there and I'm not saying that any
[Amit Varma]: of these are wrong I'm just saying that there are added shades I'd like to kind
[Amit Varma]: of talk about for example one way in which the media certainly changed say
[Amit Varma]: from when you would have started with news tractor today is that back then
[Amit Varma]: there was a broad consensus on the truth there was something called mainstream
[Amit Varma]: media which was basically mainstream which was all of all of the game there
[Amit Varma]: was a broad consensus on the truth you know there might have been slight
[Amit Varma]: ideological shades here and there with different major publications you know
[Amit Varma]: the Hindu will be a little left and so on but in general there was a broad
[Amit Varma]: consensus kidney I see hair and that's because very few people really had the
[Amit Varma]: tools of publishing the tools of distribution all of those things now
[Amit Varma]: what's happened over the last few decades is that that has kind of
[Amit Varma]: obviously by now changed completely and everything is dispersed and of course
[Amit Varma]: there are good and bad sides to that the good part obviously is that everyone is
[Amit Varma]: kind of empowered and anyone can you know add their voice to that mix like
[Amit Varma]: indeed news laundry have done and you're fighting India today and and the bad
[Amit Varma]: part of course is that everything seems to be a narrative battle today there are
[Amit Varma]: people for whom reality just doesn't matter it's you know you build your
[Amit Varma]: narrative of the world you choose your tribe and whatever fits that works for
[Amit Varma]: you and that's a story you want to hear so I might consider news laundry to be a
[Amit Varma]: journalistic outlet and of India to be not a journalistic outlet but in a sense
[Amit Varma]: they are fulfilling similar functions at opposite ends where people have similar
[Amit Varma]: views of the world and you might be feeding that view of the world with
[Amit Varma]: facts and figures and all of that my broader question was that you know when
[Amit Varma]: you speak about you've been sent a story from a village and your point is key
[Amit Varma]: listen you haven't done the rigor you know you haven't gone to the SDM and
[Amit Varma]: asked him what he thinks of the allegations and the way I look at it is
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to sort of information there are many parts to the puzzle you
[Amit Varma]: want to put together as complete a picture as you can but you'll never get
[Amit Varma]: the whole picture yeah and then there are other people who cannot put together
[Amit Varma]: as complete a picture as you but as long as they give some parts of the picture I
[Amit Varma]: actually think that is legit and I don't even know whether I'd call it journalism
[Amit Varma]: it's not journalism but it is still legit and to think of the term
[Amit Varma]: journalism as a monolithic thing so I'm kind of rambling and thinking aloud but
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying that like one of the things that I have learned at our age is that
[Amit Varma]: you know there are many things I used to think of in a particular way
[Amit Varma]: conceptually and I've realized that I need to rethink them I need to rethink
[Amit Varma]: what this means I need to rethink what a book is does a book have to be a
[Amit Varma]: hundred thousand words like earlier in the 90s were restricted by the formats
[Amit Varma]: an article is 800 words a book is a hundred thousand you know a Hollywood
[Amit Varma]: film is 90 minutes a Bollywood film is three hours and over time I've realized
[Amit Varma]: that especially in the modern age these concepts have kind of broken down down
[Amit Varma]: for me and similarly when we define journalism in a kind of a rigid way and
[Amit Varma]: I understand that you're defining it in this particular way because there's a
[Amit Varma]: certain kind of rigor you want and you've defined that as news laundry's
[Amit Varma]: mission and that's great and that's as it should be but I think that there has
[Amit Varma]: to be space for all of this stuff to also go on so I I don't disagree with
[Guest]: you I think that that is also journalism and a kind of journalism that fulfills a
[Guest]: certain I mean yeah I I'm not overwhelmingly in agreement but I'm not
[Guest]: in disagreement either I think it's an interesting thought I think there's
[Guest]: space for that thought to be entertained and maybe explored and investigated and
[Guest]: see what emerges but yeah it seems like a rational position to have what I
[Guest]: disagree with you is that Open India and News Laundry are two sides of a coin
[Guest]: Open India has no ground reporting they have outright fabricated lies I don't by
[Amit Varma]: the way just to clarify I don't mean two sides of the same coin in a
[Guest]: journalistic sense because they're not journalists yeah I mean in a narrative
[Guest]: sense yeah so so we our bedrock is ground reports now that ground report
[Guest]: could lead anywhere yeah and I will tell you most see since I may be the face of
[Guest]: News Laundry and I'm identified as liberal our reporters are not
[Guest]: ideologically as committed as you might think a many of them are not
[Guest]: ideologically which is why I like them they they do not think this side is
[Guest]: right or that side is right because a they're young so they still have that
[Guest]: doubt and I have some fantastic talented people be we go with this is what is on
[Guest]: the ground now one may choose to say that we are exploring stories that tend
[Guest]: to be more against the BJP therefore subscribe to the liberal narrative but
[Guest]: that is because the BJP is in power and in 2012 when we started the Congress is
[Guest]: a punching bag and anyone can go to 2012 and see that stuff but what we do is
[Guest]: reportage it is journalism what Open India does is not journalism so I mean
[Guest]: and I don't want to give them any more you know time or mentions because I
[Guest]: think it's a really wild gutter level thing and just because you know that has
[Guest]: a certain audience is that is not enough for me to take someone like that
[Guest]: seriously from a perspective of the craft from perspective of society DK
[Guest]: just like it's important to take an Arnab seriously it's important to take
[Guest]: you know measles seriously it's important to take Covid seriously it's
[Guest]: important to take Open India seriously as a disease which needs to be addressed but
[Guest]: if you're talking about the craft that is that you know that space so that is
[Guest]: one important thing and I think the whole my my entire flirtation of the
[Guest]: activism happened because of my deep sense of injustice that always bothered
[Guest]: me and it irritated me at many levels and I think that is why I saw in Arvind
[Guest]: someone who I liked I think you know this guy is taking on someone who needs
[Guest]: to be taken on you know for a while I voted Mayawati now I was at that time
[Guest]: you know it was at which election was this when I mean of course she didn't
[Guest]: win a single seat in Delhi but what pissed me off was that friends of mine
[Guest]: and you know the good friends we'd be you know at dinners and parties and you
[Guest]: know the Delhi scene and you belong to a certain privilege set and so you have
[Guest]: active social life you know BJP wasn't fashionable then she got Congress
[Guest]: Kodenge vote ya yeh karenge woh karenge theek hai thoda kuch BJP ko de denge kuch it
[Guest]: wasn't as polarised as it is now but when I'd say I'm a Mayawati ki party
[Guest]: you know they'd be like they'd be pin drop silence hain? why Mayawati? I was like why
[Guest]: not you know how corrupt she is? I was like do you know how corrupt really many of your
[Guest]: Congress leaders are? just cause they're DOSCOS it's fine kyu kaiyon ke bete
[Guest]: hamara saathi bete hoti hoti and what I realised was Mayawati's corruption was a
[Guest]: special kind of corruption that needed to be pointed out while others was not
[Guest]: so it wasn't about corruption it was about belonging to so I think it may
[Guest]: stem from and I'm just maybe dissecting myself although I haven't really done
[Guest]: any major introspection and seen where this comes from maybe it was that you
[Guest]: know in the privileged set I was not as privileged as the privileged so you know that thing that
[Guest]: fucking you know always root for the underdog whether it was just that I grew
[Guest]: up with you know a set of parents who I didn't see them do anything wrong in
[Guest]: their lives like fucking nothing like like sometime a dude kuch toh kar lete hain
[Guest]: koi bungla bungla chhod de like nothing you know get screwed over by people who
[Guest]: were corrupt and you know dicks maybe it was that but that is why I think like
[Guest]: there was no reason for us to start newslaundry small stream was doing very
[Guest]: well like we had like I said shows ads you're doing everything man
[Guest]: sarkari programs private programs award-winning ads we were the game in
[Guest]: town but keeda tha newslaundry chalu karna and I remember my partner saying it
[Guest]: yeah dude fine you had your little fun don't fucking fuck up the climb I mean
[Guest]: now you're gonna go separate we need to put so much more money in it VC funding
[Guest]: will come in we need to separate offices we need to compliance you do all this
[Guest]: fuck it let's just make travel shows food shows and make money and you know
[Guest]: but I see I mean when I get up every morning I get up fucking excited yeah
[Guest]: I'm trying to get to office let's fucking pick another fight today let's
[Guest]: do this and that is very addictive for me I don't care today I don't care if I
[Guest]: am driving into my friend's farmhouse in in any case which I think is a very
[Guest]: luxurious body which cost 15 like where everybody's bodies are one crore and
[Guest]: above I don't give a fuck I don't give a fuck I'm wearing track pants or chappals
[Guest]: but when I wake up every morning I am excited I am saying let's pick a fight
[Guest]: today and that to me was something that attracted me to Arvind that's something
[Guest]: that attracted me to Madhu so yeah I think that is the basic keeda and as
[Guest]: long as that keeda is there I guess I'll be excited by what I do I mean I loved
[Guest]: by the way I mean we have we probably won't discuss it because it's not of an
[Guest]: interest to you shooting high on a plate was a magical experience like seven
[Guest]: years to travel across this country by road like how many people do you know
[Guest]: who can say I have traveled to every state in this country a be by road over
[Guest]: seven years with you know three of my closest friends
[Guest]: Rokey, Mir, Prashant like fucking in a car lade, jhagde, fucking tore each other's eye
[Guest]: because you know the road buddy when you drive from Delhi to Kolkata Kolkata to
[Guest]: bloody Arunachal Nagaland you know you're gonna get on each other's nerves
[Guest]: also yeah but man what what one learns about patience about restraint about not
[Guest]: holding grudges about letting it fly when you have to about a fight is not
[Guest]: the end of the world it is it is just something you deal with and move on okay
[Amit Varma]: so I am going to defy your expectations and talk a bit more about that but in a
[Amit Varma]: bit just to kind of continue with the thought and first of all when you were
[Amit Varma]: musing about you know why did I support Mayawati was it because I was less
[Amit Varma]: privileged than them I think sometimes your privilege is not always a causation
[Amit Varma]: for the way you behave I think you know people can have opinions independent of
[Amit Varma]: where they come from though obviously those do play a part so here's my
[Amit Varma]: question we often talk about journalism as having the sacred ground that these
[Amit Varma]: are the values and you've named you know you named some values of the craft that
[Amit Varma]: this is a rigor you should show but you know we'll often all those cliches will
[Amit Varma]: come up about how you come for the afflicted of like the comfortable and
[Amit Varma]: all of that which mean a lot to me as well and at the same time it's a
[Amit Varma]: business so key you know a publisher will tell you keep a man charity
[Amit Varma]: nickel row I have you know profit banana and that is my Dharma and I get that
[Amit Varma]: completely that is completely rational now one way of looking at it and I
[Amit Varma]: strongly feel that it is true is that even for the kind of news that you do
[Amit Varma]: and what journalism should be that there is a market that market will pay and
[Amit Varma]: we'll come to that later about how you know the implications of that model and
[Amit Varma]: how I believe it can work and I think it's working for you to some extent but
[Amit Varma]: here's a thought experiment supposing that market was not there supposing the
[Amit Varma]: whole country was full of people who don't care about that kind of journalism
[Amit Varma]: they just want narratives and by the way I'm I have to say again I'm sorry it
[Amit Varma]: seems like it almost seems like you know I implied an equivalence between you
[Amit Varma]: guys and Op India I was just speaking in the narrative sense you know what I
[Amit Varma]: think about them so in the thought experiment that there is no market at
[Amit Varma]: all for this and I don't believe that to be the case I am hopeful that there is a
[Amit Varma]: market for the kind of work you do but assuming that there is no market for it
[Amit Varma]: at all my sense is that you would do it anyway that there are people who would
[Amit Varma]: do it anyway there would be a handful of people but they'd get the job done
[Amit Varma]: anyway yes which makes it a little bit like an idealistic project you know it's
[Amit Varma]: like saying that this is my dharma to do this and I will do this and even if
[Amit Varma]: there's no one reading it and no one wanting it I still kind of have to do it
[Amit Varma]: how much do you see yourself therefore as fundamentally an activist even now
[Amit Varma]: like I kind of in my mind when I was thinking about it I broke it up into two
[Amit Varma]: that was activism here and these are the things we'll talk about us come media
[Amit Varma]: ke baare me these are the things we'll talk about but during this conversation
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that they're actually the same thing that you are an activist for
[Guest]: a you know what is what is your sense of this now you know this term activist is
[Guest]: something that I never described myself as until I was described as one in one
[Guest]: of these talk shows activists then Lokpal no motor like today I'm not an
[Guest]: activist I'm a film producer I mean a TV show producer a filmmaker document
[Guest]: filmmaker I'm not an activist because for me it was never a full-time thing it
[Guest]: was something like for example when we did the first you know Dharna against
[Guest]: amendments I had worked with Meghna on a film Filhal and that time the hero that
[Guest]: was Palash Sen he's a lead singer of Euphoria so I've become friends with
[Guest]: Palash at that time so I told Arnab I know Palash this Palash ko bol aake gayega
[Guest]: woh yahan saari college wale aa jayenge toh Palash came with Euphoria and he
[Guest]: sang ki freedom and you know this charging up everybody and he didn't know
[Guest]: head or tail about RTI he came because Niku bol raha hai dost hai thekh bol raha
[Guest]: hoga honest banda hai pahun jaata hoon I remember he said hila do yahan se door nahi
[Guest]: hai parliament house hila do wahan ki sun rahi hai Sonia Gandhi and we had to
[Guest]: calm down we are not like picking a fight with Sonia Gandhi right now because
[Guest]: she's the only hope of RTI because when one was killing it she was trying to so
[Guest]: so is is Palash an activist my assumption this is I think where it
[Guest]: comes from while growing up my assumption was and it hasn't changed
[Guest]: that much that's in my expectation and I know it's doesn't pan out usually but we
[Guest]: all should do whatever we can in our own way to make things better like the
[Guest]: chartered accountant of PCRF and was chartered accountants nightmare because
[Guest]: you know we would get some grant from something from something and because the
[Guest]: government are always scrutinizing you he was working for us for free you know
[Guest]: if anyone need to be represented God Prashant ji was doing it for free you
[Guest]: know Prashant Bhushan comes from a religious family but there are others so
[Guest]: whenever you say he's an activist so I would always think and I've thought this
[Guest]: through this is not I'm just nothing allowed because I've this question I've
[Guest]: thought it through I don't see myself as an activist I don't see Prashant as an
[Guest]: activist I don't see Aruna as an activist I don't see Nikhil Dey as an
[Guest]: activist I see them as doing something that they enjoy while holding the system
[Guest]: that should make that possible to be honestly done accountable and in making
[Guest]: it accountable it is taking a disproportionate time for them to do
[Guest]: that rather than what is Arunaji's mission to run Barefoot College to run a
[Guest]: basically place where people who don't have money can have skills have access
[Guest]: do stuff to become empowered financially better off than they are now in so doing
[Guest]: bloody she has to do RTH what do I want to do I want to create a reader funded
[Guest]: news platform that takes no ads I don't want to be fighting Kalipuri in court I
[Guest]: don't be fighting bloody Time's up in court but I am fighting both of them I
[Guest]: don't want to be fighting Sakal in court but I'm doing that I don't want to be
[Guest]: dealing with IT raids in my office but I'm dealing with that and coming at 11
[Guest]: 13 already keeping me there sitting of one o'clock answering questions which
[Guest]: have no head or tail so does that make me an activist no I want to do my job
[Guest]: which excites me if you get in the way I will fight you and I think that is what
[Guest]: Prashant does that is what Arvind used to do that is what Arunaji does that is
[Guest]: what Nikhil does that is what you know I guessing everyone who calls himself
[Guest]: activists do they are doing what they think is you know excites them gives
[Guest]: them satisfaction and gives them two meals a day or whatever their
[Guest]: aspirations are and if you get in the way we will fight you in a certain way
[Amit Varma]: for some people activist has almost become a bad word but I was just kind of
[Amit Varma]: thinking in a different kind of semantic sense and thinking maybe even your
[Guest]: journalism is a kind of activism I don't I don't think it's a bad word I didn't I
[Guest]: don't find the word bad or anything it's just that it doesn't sit on my shoulders
[Guest]: so I've always wondered like when someone calls me and now senior
[Guest]: journalist I mean I say now I'm a journalist too I'm a news
[Guest]: entrepreneur I'm trying to create a model which I was told is impossible but
[Guest]: I was convinced of and I'm fucking thrilled that you know and what you are
[Guest]: saying that if there was not a single reader you're right I would still do
[Guest]: this I would convince them one at a time I would come to your show and convince
[Guest]: you that convincing when we started I mean investors go to chodo they don't
[Guest]: say right fuck shut the fuck up news supported by subscribers ads it's
[Guest]: under a subculture CPI tap tap sardines or charge for the CPI I can see p.m.
[Guest]: pandora p.m. or p.m. or the clicks per index or YouTube the pre-roll post
[Guest]: relied it's not even one-tenth of what used to be in 2012 when we started and
[Guest]: we started 2012 because I was busy shooting having a plan mother used to
[Guest]: get very irritated says to the limit of a hotel even we're going to start this
[Guest]: other to start in 2011 not only were the investors completely unconvinced that
[Guest]: you can have a model like this friends of mine yeah who meant well who meant
[Guest]: well for me this year Niku we want you to do well to a chakar to Tarakekar
[Guest]: pulp fool they can you bought a khatia idea that I could see on a I convinced
[Guest]: 10 people first he can those the hair subscribe Karla pleaser sort of a myna as a
[Guest]: click sock that's case always sock up to you so ask it maybe probably of 12 15
[Guest]: thousand paying subscribers we can say we are sustainable without any
[Guest]: advertisers we don't need ads I don't fucking have to ask you know Yogi
[Guest]: Tejri you know his ads are chaperone buddy he gives ads to Arnab also I mean
[Guest]: all the stuff that we make fun of others I mean I understand he's doing politics
[Guest]: and his ads are apparently my friend Sujit Nayyar will say he was saying yeah
[Guest]: our pads are appearing in Maharashtra papers and go like Delhi government ads
[Guest]: so I got up at such a lot I thought they'll pass I got that's a common
[Guest]: Athena mocking economy see yeah but the endoscope it hard man
[Guest]: they can both message hop they'll oh yeah I mean I don't know how to chop that
[Guest]: so we have grown it from zero subscribers to these many subscriber
[Guest]: convincing them 10 at a time 12 at a time 15 at a time I'll probably
[Guest]: shamelessly plug it on your show also you must I will be to keep these free and
[Guest]: in fact for your readers will give a discount and reveal figure something out
[Guest]: right now but see I mean whatever I have done I have done by instinct and that is
[Guest]: when also I started working news track I had just I had just taken my final year
[Guest]: exam I mean got my result I'm not highly educated I'm a BA pass economics honors
[Guest]: that's a good cause to do just to be a person so you know many of the kids who
[Guest]: work for me have done something from Amsterdam University someone has done
[Guest]: something Oxford I'll be my editor Maharaj is in Oxford on something so I've
[Guest]: done things by instinct like when I quit our stuck me and Prashant had no idea
[Guest]: what the fuck we're gonna do and like I said that self-doubt even when you turn
[Guest]: on the TV and complete laddus are sitting and reading the news and you're
[Guest]: holding your head this guy is like there and we are pretty struggling like
[Guest]: Sutya's fucking late night going to railway stations getting a tape shooting
[Guest]: ourselves editing and I can shoot I can edit I can wrangle cable which is I've
[Guest]: done I have I have never been ashamed to take a job whether it was to pick up tea
[Guest]: or wrangle cable and I remember Naseer sir was such a gentleman when we
[Guest]: were on the set of Monsoon Wedding and a lot of the kids there who are working
[Guest]: with friends of Meera's friends kids or you know other privileged kids the very
[Guest]: few kids who were really you know assistant material most of them were
[Guest]: rich kids having a nice September you know Meera's shooting a film so you know
[Guest]: the cast came in the most well-known costume was Naseer and they said
[Guest]: they are Nimbu Pani Lani so you had spot boys that spot boys hadn't come very early in
[Guest]: the morning so I had no problem getting picking up Nimbu Pani Lani and Naseer
[Guest]: sir said Nikhil don't do this I said no I'm okay he says no you don't have to
[Guest]: serve us tea and coffee on a tray you're not a spot boy I said I don't fucking
[Guest]: care let's just get the shit done so like wrangling cable I was 24 at that
[Guest]: time some of the other productions are 21 22 and a small scene had been set up
[Guest]: Chadar had been made and I'd had won an award in San Francisco and I was
[Guest]: wrangling cable I don't have a problem with it I've never been shy to work so
[Guest]: so that Keeda is what you know like I said you know everyone said it's a shit
[Guest]: idea so everything is by instinct I've when we quick news track let's do
[Guest]: something we'll do a travel show okay one document is done now what we'll
[Guest]: wait Salah who on a high when I played so actually a lot of people are very
[Guest]: surprised when they know me otherwise that you know my my rational approach to
[Guest]: life I believe in God and I pray every day and that is something a lot of
[Guest]: people who know me can't this is like seriously like what the fuck like you
[Guest]: who's rational who's scientific who has a evidence-based approach because the
[Guest]: things that have happened to me are just there has to be some other like in 2000
[Guest]: 99 you're quitting a job saying that we'll make travel shows when there is no
[Guest]: fucking market for travel shows it doesn't exist there are four channels
[Guest]: cable TV has just come in there used to be only one when you started three years
[Guest]: later you have the fucking biggest travel show in the country like what
[Guest]: explains that we'll do newslaundry friends tell you no to the body got on
[Guest]: a company to body got could go to the body got jail ponchaga we are sufficient
[Guest]: self-sufficient we don't need anyone's fucking funding we have subscribers what
[Guest]: explains that so I have a deep faith in a higher being that is watching over now
[Guest]: if you ask me why the fuck is he letting other stuff I I'm sorry I don't know
[Guest]: those answers but someone has been very good to me and I can't explain why so
[Amit Varma]: I'll link a column in the show notes are written just about how we underestimate
[Amit Varma]: luck in the sense that just the fact that we are born at all is really a few
[Amit Varma]: trillion to one and I actually tried to calculate the numbers and all of that so
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine that it's just incredibly unlikely that we should even exist but
[Amit Varma]: the point is it is inevitable that some things will exist similarly it is
[Amit Varma]: inevitable that some people will get very lucky like even I feel I got
[Amit Varma]: extremely lucky in the sense for five years ago if I was to were to pitch to
[Amit Varma]: anyone key are made Chargante key podcast karunga Chargante logo say audio
[Amit Varma]: may bad karunga I would have been kicked out the room right but luckily in these
[Amit Varma]: times I could just do it and it it can work so I think some people inevitably
[Amit Varma]: get lucky so I don't think that's necessarily evidence of a higher force
[Amit Varma]: in fact mathematics indicates that there will be some people who are extremely
[Amit Varma]: lucky and it just happens to be you and me sitting here but regardless of that
[Amit Varma]: and I'll kind of get back to that and by the way monsoon wedding I would have
[Amit Varma]: carried cables for that as well because that's one of my two favorite Indian
[Amit Varma]: films of that decade along with Luck by chance I think they're just both
[Guest]: incredible and the stories I have from that set I just just magical that that
[Guest]: funny inspiring ridiculous everything it was it was an insane that the film got
[Amit Varma]: made as a matter of miracle yeah so you know monsoon wedding being such a dear
[Amit Varma]: film to me I'd love to hear your stories from there go ahead
[Guest]: so Randeep Hooda's hand broken was not part of the script but he had fractured
[Guest]: his hand so I had to be woven into the script that was but you know now this is
[Guest]: the the cultural kind of you know friction that happens and it's not
[Guest]: always sexism but it's okay you tell me what you make out what what will you
[Guest]: call this now the camera department the cameraman was Declan Quinn he had shot
[Guest]: casino and he was one of the top 10 cinematographers of the world so I was
[Guest]: so thrilled ki bhai I'm carrying the camera because he was in his like late
[Guest]: 50s at the time and it was you know he's in monsoon when he saw on the shoulder so
[Guest]: I was wrangling cable with him and as soon as Meera called cut I was to take
[Guest]: the camera from it was an Arri you know 16 mm super 16 film you know learning
[Guest]: how to change the film role etc so that because it's you know it's hard on the
[Guest]: shoulder so you know long shots when you're when Rhea was I think Vasundhara's
[Guest]: name when she's running out he had to run tuck tuck tuck tuck tuck you have to
[Guest]: make sure doesn't trip over and he's he wasn't a young man at the time so now
[Guest]: the entire camera department was you know there was this one young girl and
[Guest]: other than a few of us the entire crew had come from overseas
[Guest]: ab wahan ja rahe hain you know New York se crew aaya hai you know Delhi ki
[Guest]: September humidity ganji si pehni hain banyan you know little vest acha we have
[Guest]: to go to Chandni Chowk and shoot so you guys get you know the audio lock down
[Guest]: it was sync sound and get all the production get a location ready to ab
[Guest]: hum bole yaar koi in ladies ko bolo ki bhai aap Chandni Chowk if you want to go
[Guest]: shoot don't come dressed like this because we were in charge of security
[Guest]: and it wasn't you know now of course it is very scary things are for security
[Guest]: but that time it was I mean it's not like we had like bouncers and all it was
[Guest]: assumed ki Nikku, Rumaan, Manav tum log hi kar lena security just make sure the
[Guest]: crowd is away now we are saying that now if we say that you know don't come to
[Guest]: Chandni Chowk later we'll sound like those Abbas beta aise kapde pehn ke jate
[Guest]: kahi but at the same time we say boss agar we have to control security aur kuch
[Guest]: ho gaya hum pit pita jaayenge wah hum teen machudu se kya what will he control
[Guest]: a crowd if you know these five white girls are coming in their ganjis and you
[Guest]: know the two you know so the whole jaddu jahed of you know who do you tell that
[Guest]: can we dress little conservatively when you go to shoot in Chandni Chowk can you
[Guest]: not expect us to do the security or let us be home kyunki humara bhi phir face
[Guest]: saving nahi hoga you know this was a very interesting conversation that
[Guest]: happened and then there was one scene if you remember when the cops find the guy
[Guest]: who's the anchor making out of the Sundhara in that in the car right now
[Guest]: that actually was not in a car that whole scene was in Jamali Kamali the
[Guest]: cans got fogged when they went to New York they went through the x-ray so the
[Guest]: first shoot was done at Jamali Kamali in one of those old tombs now in Delhi to
[Guest]: shoot you have to get like hundreds of permission iski uski so one without
[Guest]: police permission and that was about it now you had to do that scene and Meera
[Guest]: said and it was sync sound so you couldn't have it wasn't dubbed and that
[Guest]: time sync sound was very new so you know we were so we were in charge of the
[Guest]: audio lockdown just making sure the set is quiet wrangling cable now the cops
[Guest]: lined up they said bas do ghante ho gaye nikhlo you have to get out and the scene
[Guest]: wasn't done so Meera's instructions were so you do what you can I have to finish
[Guest]: this scene so first you try to talk to the cops outside and tell them to talk
[Guest]: quietly you know pretend that you're just talking to them while she finishes
[Guest]: the scene then you keep talking to them then they start getting in then at one
[Guest]: stage I was physically holding a cop back from moving to the scene and he
[Guest]: said tune chui kaise meri vardhi teri himmat kaise hoi I was like fuck I'm gonna get
[Guest]: beaten up here and it was like and it's like later and we had gone to 12 12 1
[Guest]: and next morning you had to get to the location at 4 it was a trip like no
[Guest]: other I mean it was and the the the scene the this thing seen in fact if you
[Guest]: see and I've also posted this on Twitter the party scene chundhari chundhari when
[Guest]: Neha's dancing I'm ordering Bacardi at the bar oh nice because there was no
[Guest]: budget for extras so whoever is not required immediately imperatively for
[Guest]: this shot go to wardrobe put on a pair of shadi clothes and come stand in the
[Guest]: crowd as guests so all those guests of Madhu's you know that old lady dancing
[Guest]: that's sorry Meera's mother there's a couple there they're friends of her
[Guest]: some defense colony so of course all of us who could be spared for like five
[Guest]: minute shots went wore shadi clothes from the wardrobe came and started
[Guest]: ordering Bacardi and started doing stuff like that so now I freeze that scene
[Guest]: where you know Alia's father you know the young girl who Alia her father which
[Guest]: is played by Vohra Rahul Vohra he's you know at the bar talking to someone so
[Guest]: I'm at the back ordering a one Bacardi coke please that was my line and then
[Guest]: you're trying to sip as long as you can hoping that retake per retake ho so that
[Guest]: we get a breather because otherwise it was hard work even sipping so much
[Guest]: Bacardi it was it was a trip man it was just a wonderful wonderful experience I
[Amit Varma]: learned so much on that set I'm also curious about you know this is media but
[Amit Varma]: at the same time it seems very different from everything else that you're doing
[Amit Varma]: did you want to be a filmmaker I mean I know you've made many documentaries and
[Amit Varma]: done a lot of that but did you also at some point say that okay I these are the
[Guest]: kind of movies I want to make and I have four scripts written and sitting at my
[Guest]: table for the last nine ten years I wrote my first script in 2002 when I was
[Guest]: working on Filhaal with Meghna because I just found the whole experience of
[Guest]: filmmaking so bizarre where most of our time is to be spent waiting for either
[Guest]: Sushmita or some star to show up I was like dude on Monsoon Running and that is
[Guest]: when I disagreed a lot with people that oh Bombay is very professional Delhi's
[Guest]: not professional Bombay Delhi's are professional I was like dude I've just
[Guest]: come from a set in Delhi where we shot a film in 26 days and I was a foreign
[Amit Varma]: crew there this is completely different I was like dude here I'm spending four
[Guest]: hours a day just waiting for a star to show up what are you talking about what
[Guest]: are you even talking about so that is something I didn't agree with I didn't
[Guest]: get that and I've written a piece on this also on one of my earlier blogs but
[Guest]: but just the whole experience and you know our producer Jhamu Sugandh
[Guest]: remember there was that Bharat Shah you know that whole that there was he was
[Guest]: laundering money so Jhamu Sugandh was the guy who produced Hum Dil Dechi Ke Sanam
[Guest]: he became very big after that and he produced a whole bunch of films so there
[Guest]: was some inquiry on him on back then I don't know so half way through the film
[Guest]: of course in Bollywood lingo you have to call him Jhamuji everything GGG Jhamuji
[Guest]: was missing so no one knew whether the fifth schedule will happen or not I was
[Guest]: finding it bizarre then usually an AD is a faalto like you will not be hanging
[Guest]: with the stars because I was Meghna's friend and she was a director so places
[Guest]: where the AD did not really belong would go like Sushmita's birthday bash you
[Guest]: know after the whole thing because when you're shooting a film for that duration
[Guest]: it's just those people who are your life and which is what I find very strange
[Guest]: which is why I have a thesis anyone who works in showbiz in Bollywood is not
[Guest]: what we would call normal emotionally that is their normal but in our world
[Guest]: that would be an unhinged an unequilibrium place because you work with
[Guest]: such intense proximity with the crew for like a long time where you have affairs
[Guest]: you have crying, jhagda, ladai everything with those people then tak you move on to
[Guest]: another crew and you might not see these people ever again or you might not see
[Guest]: them in three years like even some of the people who I met from you know
[Guest]: monsoon rain today it's been what it's been 20 years we still meet like we are
[Guest]: fucking chaddi buddies we are not we were together for three months three
[Guest]: intense months when you were on set for 16, 14, 15, 12 hours so you were like
[Guest]: sadowing together, bitching people out together, laughing together so you get
[Guest]: very intense bonds that's why a lot of affairs happen on film sets because that
[Guest]: is your life like normally if you have a birthday party, I have a birthday party
[Guest]: the 20 people there will be my close friends if I'm having a bigger party
[Guest]: than the peripheral you know circle then the further circle if you are having a grand party
[Guest]: but if you have a party of 20 people, they will be your childhood friends
[Guest]: now I used to find it very strange that there are 20 people in this party and I am also a
[Guest]: faggot and I have nothing to do with it and he is also a faggot, he doesn't even know
[Guest]: they've also met only, where are his friends? and I realized that in Bollywood
[Guest]: when you are on a project, your friend is shooting for some other project in Thailand
[Guest]: some in Australia, some in Malaysia because if all your friends are from Bollywood
[Guest]: okay, your other friends don't fit in with this world, they are not from Bombay
[Guest]: so I figured that emotionally showbiz you have to be a little unhinged to
[Guest]: survive, to have an emotional kind of to make sense of your world because your
[Guest]: closest friends are changing every film so many such experiences I said yeah
[Guest]: this is a film so while I was there I had so much time I started writing a
[Guest]: film and I wrote it then I wrote another film this is about reporting and
[Guest]: elections because I saw news is such a ridiculous space so I have got four
[Guest]: scripts ready but you see you want to do too much in life I want to do that also
[Guest]: I want to do activism, I want to do news laundry also so maybe in another 3-4 years when
[Guest]: you know someone else can take over as CEO of news laundry and run it
[Guest]: crowdfunding kar lo abhi aa jayenge
[Guest]: yeah but I I mean I think maybe another year it'll be stable enough to just run
[Guest]: systems and completely be in place but yeah I absolutely want to make I think
[Guest]: cinema being on a film set is a magical experience if you've been on a film set
[Guest]: man it's addictive and I can see why people get addicted to wanting to make
[Guest]: it and spend their lives go to depression, get into drugs, alcoholism, attempt
[Guest]: suicide but they will not say fuck it let me give up and go back and do
[Guest]: something else that pull is so tempting it is a the stakes are so high if you
[Guest]: make it you fucking make it man and just the buzz the energy like I remember and
[Guest]: also the bitching I don't you know this is one scene I'll never forget
[Guest]: on that day Devdas was being shot
[Guest]: Bhansali, Bhansali and so there was an accident and that time a bunch of films
[Guest]: were being made there was this Bas Itta Sa Khwab Hai, Abhishek Bachchan, Phil
[Guest]: Hall was being shot so you know in Kamalistan there are 4-5 film sets
[Guest]: all lunch together at least us lower down people would do lunch in the lawn
[Guest]: together with the Lightman, Shytman etc and that time this Olive was a new
[Guest]: place so matlab palil se neeche ho Bandra mein wahan par tha it was this new
[Guest]: everybody came back you know went there at the end of the shoot people at my
[Guest]: level didn't but because I was you know her friend who was good wherever she
[Guest]: was invited so I would also go there so we were there and I don't know whether
[Guest]: we were celebrating you know a birthday or so it was of course stars there was
[Guest]: you know Phil Hall with the stars of other films sitting left right and there
[Guest]: had been an accident on Sanjay Leel Bhansali set where one of those storm
[Guest]: fans had fallen and it had killed one of the Lightman or the set spot boys do
[Amit Varma]: you remember this at all I don't remember this at all but if you google
[Guest]: it there was a death on Sanjay Leel Bhansali set and then Devdas ki shooting
[Guest]: band ho gayi, shuru ho gayi ki nahi, now that is when I realized that fucking no one is
[Guest]: anyone's friend here dude the thrill of bitching out that this film may stop
[Guest]: Charu ki film rukh chahiye and every table was talking about that
[Guest]: because I was a fly on the wall bhai mera na lena na dena no one want to talk to
[Guest]: Saidi Adi so I was just there because I was I would go hang out near this table
[Guest]: hang out near that table everyone talking about the same thing because it's a very
[Guest]: small it's like if you think the news world is incestuous Bollywood is that and
[Guest]: more, ek doosre ki baate karni, navel gazing, wo sade, wo gire, wo, toh mera bhi
[Guest]: mujhe bada fascinating laga, achha mene waha dekha, thoda dekhta, shahrukh comes in
[Guest]: in his typical style half his shirt tucked in half out looking very tired
[Guest]: in his jutti type and jeans dude I am NOT joking every table got up stood in
[Guest]: line like they're doing a baratiyon ka swagat, hey Shahrukh how are you man everything
[Guest]: okay oh man love you man I was like fuckers you're not bitching him out like
[Guest]: in front of me five minutes ago have you no shame I can see you still but dude
[Guest]: that's the fucking world and I mean I've given you one instance there was just so
[Guest]: many instances I saw that no one's anyone's enemy no one's anyone's friend
[Guest]: you are just an ally for the period of your film emotionally that puts you in a
[Guest]: state of relationships which I don't consider normal when I commit to someone
[Guest]: of course a single guy at 47 saying this but I don't mean romantically commit I
[Guest]: mean when I commit friendship to someone and that person is my friend everybody
[Guest]: else is noise I may be nice to you I may be friendly with you but I'm not your
[Guest]: friend my friends remain constant through life I have old friends who
[Guest]: we've been together since you're six years old eight years ten year old I've
[Guest]: made very few new friends in my life maybe in my mid 20s I kind of finished
[Guest]: I've made maybe half a dozen since but if someone were to say who are your
[Guest]: friends it's been the same names for years in showbiz it's not like that
[Guest]: which is like for example Amitabh Bachchan's father died like tomorrow God
[Guest]: forbid you know my parent any parent you know they all have to die at some point
[Guest]: who do the people my side you know about my friends who knew him who grew up with
[Guest]: him you know no not Amar Singh and Anil Ambani who I met five years ago yeah but
[Guest]: do you have any close friends that that world doesn't allow it so I find the
[Guest]: whole emotional equilibrium of showbiz and the emotional equilibrium of non
[Guest]: showbiz are very different maybe it's different for sports persons I've never
[Guest]: observed them closely but yeah I observed that so I wrote about that I
[Guest]: wrote films that maybe they'll never get produced maybe I'll just leave them and
[Guest]: if someone wants to produce them I think they're fantastic scripts maybe I will
[Guest]: one day but yes to the your answer I f**k yeah I want to make a movie
[Amit Varma]: I'll write it down for you, the day you decide, the day you find a CEO for
[Amit Varma]: news laundry and you open this up for crowdfunding no worse you'll get the
[Amit Varma]: funding I'll write it down but we'll come back to that later from what you said
[Amit Varma]: about the emotional equilibrium of Bollywood and how they're shaped so
[Amit Varma]: differently one of the things I've been musing on recently is how what we do
[Amit Varma]: changes us in such profound ways like just you know at the very basic level of
[Amit Varma]: my podcast I'm doing for our interviews or whatever that forces me to research
[Amit Varma]: and go deeper than I otherwise would it forces me to listen you know for shorter
[Amit Varma]: stuff you don't listen it forces me to read a lot more all of these things and
[Amit Varma]: I feel that's changed me in some ways now obviously you see these changes in a
[Amit Varma]: much more extreme and obvious form in something like Bollywood where you are
[Amit Varma]: in those compressed environments of great intensity and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: you see those perhaps in the work you do you see those in politics where I've
[Amit Varma]: always held that politics invariably corrodes character because you're
[Amit Varma]: constantly making compromises and building personas who are not who you
[Amit Varma]: are and eventually the person you know the mokotas you wear become you
[Amit Varma]: I'm you know I don't know if that's the case with Arvind you know him much
[Amit Varma]: better but I would always sort of it as a general rule of politics so what would
[Amit Varma]: be your reflections on that and also to what extent do you think that the kind
[Amit Varma]: of work that you do has also shaped you in terms of what you are because of
[Amit Varma]: course you are I saw the slip of yours where you talk about journalism being a
[Amit Varma]: combat sport and you say that man I saw who very personality as he has so it's
[Amit Varma]: fit for you so in a sense that causation is coming that the kind of work you do
[Amit Varma]: is because of the kind of person you are but does it also work the other way
[Amit Varma]: because you constantly have to therefore in your line of work especially if
[Amit Varma]: you're doing journalism with rigor as you spoke about you have to be a
[Amit Varma]: constant skeptic you have to constantly question everything not be quick to
[Guest]: judgment what's your sense of this well friends who've known me for years will
[Guest]: like scoff if you say that I'm not quick to judgment they find me the most
[Guest]: judgmental because you know have arguments and fight at social dues where
[Guest]: you should not do that on political issues on someone saying something and I
[Guest]: wouldn't just let it pass I'm like that's not okay fuck you and sometimes
[Guest]: people will pass so they took it as judgmental I didn't see that as
[Guest]: judgmental it's just that you don't let certain things slide but you're right
[Guest]: things become habits you know like smoking like writing as follows are sub
[Guest]: following the news seeing what was the right thing to do at a governance level
[Guest]: following governance following the news in a way which is unhealthy for you like
[Guest]: you know I had gone with my sis for a holiday and we would you know driving in
[Guest]: the u.s. the whole that that whatever the concierge Colorado River Grand Canyon
[Guest]: and you know you do that whole Vegas to Bobby I'd keep checking any TV app
[Guest]: Indian Express app she said fucking switch off man you can't switch off
[Guest]: that's something on news professionals most news people I know can't switch off
[Guest]: now I'm sure that takes its toll on us mental health I mean maybe someone to
[Guest]: someone else I'm a complete fucking basket case warped what is the
[Guest]: equilibrium it is different for different people that is one thing not
[Guest]: being able to switch off questioning governance and also the model you choose
[Guest]: because we are subscription based not wanting to go for the click thing stuff
[Guest]: that is solid but people think it valuable enough it's not like I don't
[Guest]: want to be news long to be a really big kind of but I'm in no hurry you know it
[Guest]: has to be done on our terms so it does shape you because of the decisions you
[Guest]: made it and many you know I've changed my view about many other things like
[Guest]: about now the other thing what you said I had a very judgmental view on politics
[Guest]: and politicians now I have a more nuanced view because I understand the
[Guest]: game that is being played I mean I'll give you some examples of my why
[Guest]: considering I was one of the dozen at the you know PCRF level when there are
[Guest]: several million people in the party why I'm and why am I not there it was the
[Guest]: most obvious thing Arvind contested Santosh contested Manish contested
[Guest]: well fucked it until they could not contest you know it so I knew that was
[Guest]: not for me how did I know that was not for me was that when we were running
[Guest]: that whole Jamboree circus call it what you want of course it was an event we
[Guest]: had to get eyeballs that was whole idea I mean I asked Mayur to come I asked
[Guest]: Rocky to come they have no interest in activism they came because they're friends
[Guest]: of mine I said tomorrow we'll get coverage that Rocky Mayur will come
[Guest]: then you call up a friend and write a report because it is about media management dude
[Guest]: it's let's not kid ourselves that was a very important one when Arvind will go
[Guest]: on stage it should be in the evening people are fucking watching TV okay now
[Guest]: but we used to be sitting there so you know and again I think this whole
[Guest]: emotional equilibrium being in a bizarre land if you have to be a politician this
[Guest]: this combination like I have a theory that bureaucrats have to be either
[Guest]: servile or completely obnoxious and bossy and I asked Mr. Lavasa this in the
[Guest]: interview that either they are will treat you like your shit that means
[Guest]: you're below them but when joint secretary better secretary I get it then
[Guest]: yes sir no sir like fucking have some dignity yeah minister Raja to ladies
[Guest]: anger so if you are going from such civility to such obnoxious arrogance
[Guest]: several times a day you're fucking mentally fucked here when we would be
[Guest]: sitting and you know some days there were no crowds would be coming you don't
[Guest]: figure out how do we SMS bhejo yeh karo wo karo studio java used to be going
[Guest]: from studio to studio you know arguing with Singh V and Sanjay Jha and all and
[Guest]: that's another thing me and Sanjay Jha used to have such ugly debates because I
[Guest]: was representing team Anna what was called and I would rather call it team
[Guest]: Lokpal and he was representing the Congress because he was like cause I
[Guest]: spoke so of course and we had such ugly exchanges in fact we bumped into each
[Guest]: other and with a think fest and it was a nasty exchange now if we meet we're
[Guest]: friendly you see it's changed now we have a common that time he was my
[Guest]: adversary now his adversity was mine I had back then you know I had very close
[Guest]: friends from who are now in this camp who would happily entertain me today
[Guest]: they will not so when we used to be getting these crowds etc together we'd
[Guest]: be sitting and I don't know if you remember you were in Bombay but that
[Guest]: whole Jan Lokpal movement was no one we hadn't seen anything like this in India
[Guest]: it had become an event and now the farmers the numbers that they have at
[Guest]: ten times on their bad day what we had on our best day you know the ten times
[Guest]: more but is it in the television event no it's not five thousand people on
[Guest]: Jantar Mantar was a bigger television event then one lakh farmers out of him
[Guest]: twenty are dead probably it's more it's probably number is fifty but it's not an
[Guest]: event our production is a small production was a fucking big event every
[Guest]: night in prime time we were all there during that time there are people who
[Guest]: got excited and said desh badlenge, next revolution aayi hai, jasba hum mein bhi tha hai
[Guest]: we used to get excited jab wo stage se you know dil diya hai, we used to fucking we used to
[Guest]: feel them of course backstage jaake we used to be two-sowing ourselves and we'd say
[Guest]: bloody Anna is not eating so many people said tumhe sharam nahi hai, tum kha rahe hain, Anna nahi kha rahe hain
[Guest]: toh main kha hai yaar bhai toh uski choice hai mere toh main kone mein jaake khaal deta tha
[Guest]: but there were some guys who wouldn't eat yaar until Anna eats I won't eat one of them
[Guest]: still works with Arvind till today I was like dude you'll fucking die Anna's used to it
[Guest]: he's doing this every two three years you've never done this you're like 25
[Guest]: your body's eating up fat faster he didn't fucking eat till Anna ate, there were people like that at the back
[Guest]: and they're still there in the history the one thing that fucking used to get
[Guest]: my goat and we know how hard it is to produce this whole event how hard it is
[Guest]: to excite people and want them to make change you'll sit in the evening
[Guest]: Ghaziabad mein office ho raha tha, some fucking three chootiyas will walk in
[Guest]: tum logon yeh karna nahi hai, tum yeh ho, tum gande ho, tum wo sade ho
[Guest]: Arvind and Manish should sit and listen to it yaar, haan toh humein kya karna chahiye, accha aap bata hai
[Guest]: I'd say fuck you yaar, who the fuck are you to tell me kya karna chahiye, chal tune kya kiya life mein
[Guest]: chalte phirte, roz gaali khao kisi se, na hum so rahe hain, na paisa kama rahe hain, sad rahe hain roz
[Guest]: aur log aake lecture din lag jaate hain, I used to get very irritated
[Guest]: Arvind said you can't lose your temper here, I mean you got to listen to the guy
[Guest]: he has a worse life than you, he is probably in some slum, his life is shit
[Guest]: your day's been shit na, his life is shit, let him come and vent here
[Guest]: I couldn't do that, I'd fucking flip out, and fucking they could sit and listen to people
[Guest]: tell them that they are fucking shit every day, having had such a miserable day
[Guest]: I was like dude this is not for me man, I fucking can't do this, I can't sit and bloody listen to some people
[Guest]: telling me I'm a chutiya, after I've been working my ass off, just because his life is worse than mine
[Guest]: I'm giving you one instance, there are many instances of letting something slide
[Guest]: and I understand, and what fascinates me is that many journalists who have covered politics for much longer than I have
[Guest]: and I'm not saying they should not criticise, they must criticise, but even when they are not publicly criticising
[Guest]: when they are discussing politics, their understanding of politics is dismal
[Guest]: politics is not the game you are playing, it's a different game, it's up to you whether you want to play it or not
[Guest]: you play your game, but many of them say this is what this one should do, I'm like dude you have no idea
[Guest]: what it takes, when there are 20,000 people joining your party every day
[Guest]: if you think you are going to be doing a due diligence and head hunting on each of them
[Guest]: which one should be allowed and which should be taken, your party will be like Jay Prakash, Narayan Vajju
[Guest]: Hyderabad, Lok Satta, you will get one seat at some point and then that is it
[Guest]: you are not a CEO of a board that is vetting people and hiring them
[Guest]: when anyone joins Usenry, they have three stages of vetting
[Guest]: when you are launching a party, there is zero stage of vetting, they are just fucking coming
[Guest]: those who stick to it, stick to it, those who leave, leave, that's it
[Guest]: I'm giving you a basic level, but I understood how messaging works, I understood how politics works
[Guest]: I understood what it takes for a bunch of losers in a room to make a movement that became the biggest thing
[Guest]: since fucking Quit India movement or whatever it is or JP's movement
[Guest]: to a party, I get it, it's not my game, I don't want to play that game
[Guest]: not now anyway, maybe when I'm 60 and I feel that I have zero fucks to give
[Guest]: like we were talking, but it's a game which is not
[Guest]: what fascinates me is how few people understand that
[Guest]: and what your expectations from that game should be and what your expectations from this game should be
[Guest]: again I repeat, that's not to say that one should not impose your values on politics
[Guest]: otherwise they will go off the rails, they have to be held to account to what they said yesterday versus yesterday
[Guest]: but it's too complicated and there are too many compromises that I would find hard to
[Amit Varma]: did that game change the people who did play it?
[Guest]: of course it did, but it better have, otherwise they have no business being there
[Guest]: otherwise they'll have one little spark in the pan and that's the end of it
[Guest]: if they want to grow, they have to learn
[Guest]: and I was telling you about Barkha, a lot of people critique her and criticize her for a lot of reasons
[Guest]: and some justified, some completely unjustified, but she's a super hard worker for which I have a lot of respect for
[Guest]: I mean she works harder than people half her age and she is a phenomenal learner
[Guest]: she does one f**k up, she knows what the f**k up is, she's got the intelligence to identify it
[Guest]: and move on to the best, she will transition with the only person who I've seen who's a better learner than her is Aravind
[Guest]: I've seen him not knowing how to handle 10 people, to figuring that out
[Guest]: to not knowing how to handle 100 people, to f**king knowing how to handle a million
[Guest]: and he'll keep f**king up, but the thing is that when that whole thing happened
[Guest]: and Aravind Tavleen Singh used to keep writing this, this is Neeti Central
[Amit Varma]: another rag, that was a proto-op India in a way
[Guest]: yeah correct, every third week, this is the end, what a foolish mistake resigning from Chief Minister
[Guest]: oh my god, masterstroke by Amit Shah, Kiran Bedi, I've worked with Kiran ji
[Guest]: the moment she was made Chief Minister in Canada of BJP, I tweeted it and you can see on my Twitter
[Guest]: I was like dude, BJP is done, they will be happy if they get double digits
[Guest]: because I've worked with her, she is a star, she can't handle it
[Guest]: so, that oh he's resigned, this is the end of the movement, this is the end of the party
[Guest]: that movement and that party, their obituary has been written so many times in print shamelessly
[Guest]: after getting it wrong three times and I, the Times of India piece that I wrote, I was like the one thing that I can tell you is
[Guest]: this guy, till he is on earth, is not going down
[Guest]: he will f**k up, he will identify his f**k up, he'll say okay let's fix this, move
[Guest]: and he'll become bigger and better at that game, the game he chooses to play
[Amit Varma]: so I have a follow up question here, which is, I just recorded with M R Madhavan of PRS yesterday
[Amit Varma]: and I don't know whether that episode will come before this or after, but one of the things we were discussing was
[Amit Varma]: how politics and coming to power involves many different games, not one game
[Amit Varma]: and the context in which I mentioned this to him was, one game is how to win elections
[Amit Varma]: which a party may master and if it comes to power, obviously it has mastered
[Amit Varma]: and the other game is governance, where they might be starting with a completely clean slate
[Amit Varma]: and have to learn from scratch and all that and he pointed out how there is a third game after you become a minister
[Amit Varma]: but let's not go there, but in the context of say Mr. Kejriwal
[Amit Varma]: whom I don't know personally and you have obviously known him very closely
[Amit Varma]: and this is a question that could apply to many similar politicians, to in fact many people who enter politics
[Amit Varma]: is that it seems that there are two games here for him, you know maybe three but here are the first two
[Amit Varma]: one game is that you get into the kind of work you do, whether you call it activism or not, social work, whatever
[Amit Varma]: because you have a set of principles, you want to bring about a certain change
[Amit Varma]: that's why you get into it, then you enter politics and you are playing actually a different game
[Amit Varma]: where your game is to win power no matter what happens, those principles are orthogonal
[Amit Varma]: sometimes they may help, sometimes they may not matter at all because what you need to do to win power
[Amit Varma]: is something completely different and then you get to power.
[Amit Varma]: Now there is of course a third game of governance on how you make things happen but let's leave that aside for the moment
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that there are times where there can be a harsh conflict between these two games
[Amit Varma]: you might for example begin with liberal principles but then to get elected if you have to appeal to say an illiberal polity
[Amit Varma]: you know if you have to, you know like one of the things that I have criticized the Aam Aadmi Party on for example in recent years
[Amit Varma]: is not speaking up adequately on issues like the abolition of 370 or the CAA-NRC protests or at different points in time
[Guest]: not speaking up would still be okay but endorsing it saying we welcome what happened in Kashmir
[Amit Varma]: in Kashmir is just, I mean I don't have words for it, it's just horrendous
[Amit Varma]: and I understand the political rationale which members of the Aam Aadmi Party have given me
[Amit Varma]: that listen his focus, his narrative is a governance narrative
[Amit Varma]: he'll do the work in education and health and all of that and that's what people want
[Amit Varma]: and he will not fight with the BJP on you know social issues because the Hindu vote is what it is
[Guest]: or not yet anyway
[Amit Varma]: and that doesn't sit well with me, I understand the political logic
[Amit Varma]: but what I would then say is that okay he might be making some progress
[Amit Varma]: or he might be doing it for reasons that are rational within that second game of getting votes and winning elections
[Amit Varma]: so my personal view is you cannot out-out Hindutva BJP
[Amit Varma]: but yeah if you're saying I won't fight on that front, I'll fight on the governance front
[Amit Varma]: where I'm in a strong position, I get that logic
[Amit Varma]: but that first game then I would say you have completely lost it
[Amit Varma]: because then what do you stand for
[Amit Varma]: and I find that there is a certain kind of contradiction there
[Amit Varma]: and I have asked this even in the context of the BJP
[Amit Varma]: because on the one hand the BJP comes out of the social movement that has certain beliefs
[Amit Varma]: that again I could not disagree with more strongly
[Amit Varma]: and on the other hand they also have this great will to power
[Amit Varma]: where no matter what it takes they will win elections
[Amit Varma]: they'll go to the Northeast and say you guys eat beef, no issues with you guys eating beef
[Amit Varma]: or politicians that they were abusing one day they'll welcome into the party the next day
[Amit Varma]: or buy them off when they lose the elections because there is a will to power
[Amit Varma]: and my question there to you know people within the know
[Amit Varma]: or people sympathetic to them has always been that
[Amit Varma]: is there a conflict there between their true beliefs and you know actually winning the vote
[Amit Varma]: but that's a separate question
[Amit Varma]: you've seen sort of Arvind close up how would you respond to this
[Amit Varma]: I mean how would you respond to this
[Guest]: see I mean I don't want to be too dishonest
[Guest]: and at the same time I don't want to you know kind of use my proximity to him
[Guest]: to discuss stuff that I don't think is fair as a friend who's known him for 20 odd years
[Guest]: and through being a co-traveller you know at least a part of
[Guest]: and you know when the first election happened I had not joined the party officially
[Guest]: like it was this confusing thing like on the one hand I was a founder member
[Guest]: but I did not take party membership because when the party was actually announced
[Guest]: this whole thing that you know when Digvijay Singh said ki
[Guest]: khud chalaar laddo it's like you're not agreeing with anything
[Guest]: and he had no intention of fighting any election
[Guest]: had those continuous barbs and provocation not happened
[Guest]: there would be no AAP today
[Guest]: now many people say that oh he had a long game plan
[Guest]: I can tell you with certainty it would be a miracle to get him a contested election
[Guest]: the Arvind of 2006-2007 even up to 2009-10
[Guest]: ab usse vote nahi dalwa paaye hum sala yeh election ladwaayenge
[Guest]: he was not interested that continuous barbs
[Guest]: theek hai you know this Mani Shankar hai yaar
[Guest]: these gutter snipes these keedaas I remember the way he used to talk
[Amit Varma]: contested election contested election
[Guest]: he said okay f**k you I will contest an election yaar
[Guest]: it was pure f**k you to them yaar
[Guest]: that is why he contested
[Guest]: now when that decision happened it happened you know behind us
[Guest]: where all the emporiums in Delhi wo baba khadak singh marg
[Guest]: wahan peeche ek badi si ek auditorium hai pata nahi
[Guest]: kiska tha wo diya tha hume
[Guest]: and it was all that we will do everything by referendum
[Guest]: which of course came to bite him also
[Guest]: you know shiru mein karna chahiye ki nahi karna chahiye
[Guest]: haan haan karna chahiye
[Guest]: okay we have a party and now we are all founding members
[Guest]: but before that you know there have been a smaller meeting with
[Guest]: Kiran ji with Prashant and all that
[Guest]: the party will be formed
[Guest]: he knows which way the crowd is going to go
[Guest]: and if he wants the crowd to go this way he will
[Guest]: put the proposition in a way that
[Guest]: he will win the proposition
[Guest]: which is why when Prashant and Yogendra ji and all left the party
[Guest]: who left with them yaar
[Guest]: did it impact the party kuch nahi hua
[Guest]: see I will just come to the 2-3 other things that I learnt
[Guest]: one thing I learnt is you cannot come on Sunday practice
[Guest]: and be the captain of the team
[Guest]: to be the captain of the team you have to be in the bunkers
[Guest]: everyday with the boys
[Guest]: if you are not everyday with the boys in the bunkers
[Guest]: on Sunday you come and say I am the best player
[Guest]: because I have a law degree
[Guest]: the players will say thank you
[Guest]: but you are not our captain
[Guest]: the guy who has been in the bunker everyday with us is our captain
[Guest]: they got that wrong
[Guest]: they thought because they are smarter
[Guest]: they are more articulate
[Guest]: they have more degrees
[Guest]: they will prevail
[Guest]: no that's not how politics works
[Guest]: it is the time you spend
[Guest]: which is why Rahul
[Guest]: give it 24 hours of your day
[Guest]: the guy had no life for that time yaar
[Guest]: he wouldn't go home
[Guest]: whereas the rest of us would go home
[Guest]: nahaad hokhe phir monday ko aate the
[Guest]: woh toh saara din wahi tha
[Guest]: toh jab aap aayenge
[Guest]: aur hazaar log baithe hain
[Guest]: unko bolenge
[Guest]: boss meri baat sunenge hai arvind
[Guest]: kiski baat sunenge ho
[Guest]: it's common sense yaar
[Guest]: and we privileged don't get it
[Guest]: we think because we are smarter
[Guest]: we are more articulate
[Guest]: we are better looking
[Guest]: they will listen to us
[Guest]: they won't
[Guest]: now what is your question sorry
[Guest]: ya ya
[Guest]: I still have faith in him
[Guest]: I believe
[Guest]: his moral compass is
[Guest]: too solid
[Guest]: to become
[Guest]: what many of the others
[Guest]: like to do what a couple
[Guest]: do I always agree with what he does?
[Guest]: no, I don't
[Guest]: which is another reason I could probably
[Guest]: never be in politics
[Guest]: you know I'd have to go and speak
[Guest]: I remember when we had to go and
[Guest]: defend Kiran ji is that
[Guest]: SCI remember when she did that whole
[Guest]: she did this whole skit
[Guest]: I remember I was holding my head
[Guest]: I was like dude come on
[Guest]: don't ask me to defend this
[Guest]: on prime time at night
[Guest]: because sometimes you can't
[Guest]: defend shit man
[Guest]: but I
[Guest]: I think he
[Guest]: if there is anyone
[Guest]: who can take down the BJP
[Guest]: in this country
[Guest]: it is him
[Guest]: and they know it
[Guest]: otherwise you think
[Guest]: they gave a shit one
[Guest]: state which had none
[Guest]: when they came in
[Guest]: Rajnath Singh removed that
[Guest]: one ACB that was under him
[Guest]: the anti-corruption
[Guest]: other Delhi chief minister
[Guest]: has only one police station
[Guest]: under her
[Guest]: which Shira Dixit didn't use
[Guest]: for 15 years
[Guest]: as soon as he came
[Guest]: he got an affair against
[Guest]: Sibal, Ambani and Moily
[Guest]: remember?
[Guest]: and they did that in parliament
[Guest]: they passed that whatever
[Guest]: resolution and
[Guest]: that was taken
[Guest]: they have been doing politics
[Guest]: long enough to identify the guy
[Guest]: who is their biggest threat
[Guest]: it is not Rahul
[Guest]: it is this guy
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: and like I said
[Guest]: I think that his utterances
[Guest]: on Kashmir were
[Guest]: and they just did not
[Guest]: said okay with me
[Guest]: you can't abandon
[Guest]: our Kashmiri brothers and
[Guest]: sisters like that
[Guest]: ironically
[Guest]: fucking it
[Guest]: they came to
[Guest]: do the same thing to
[Guest]: the Delhi
[Guest]: LG was overruling everything
[Guest]: but I also understand
[Guest]: politics enough to know
[Guest]: what is being done
[Guest]: why
[Guest]: I will never publicly
[Guest]: endorse it
[Guest]: and I will always question
[Guest]: because as a journalist
[Guest]: that is why
[Guest]: I just use my
[Guest]: call myself a journalist
[Guest]: okay
[Guest]: I consciously wouldn't
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: as a citizen
[Guest]: I cannot endorse that
[Guest]: but do I understand that
[Guest]: yes I understand that
[Guest]: and do I believe
[Guest]: that this guy
[Guest]: is morally corrupt
[Guest]: no
[Guest]: that I don't
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: I will still vouch for him
[Guest]: he is my friend
[Guest]: and one can
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: reject it
[Guest]: if there is someone
[Guest]: I have seen
[Guest]: who is
[Guest]: uncorruptible
[Guest]: it is even
[Guest]: I will tell you
[Guest]: talking about
[Guest]: whose support
[Guest]: you should take or not take
[Guest]: we were to set up
[Guest]: an RTI
[Guest]: we had two RTI
[Guest]: wards
[Guest]: it happened in the
[Guest]: Nehru centre
[Guest]: what is it
[Guest]: Teen Murthy centre
[Guest]: it was in partnership
[Guest]: with Zee
[Guest]: Mr.
[Guest]: Goyal was very fond of Arvind
[Guest]: so Zee used to do
[Guest]: a lot of support
[Guest]: to us
[Guest]: RTI campaigns
[Guest]: they had sponsored
[Guest]: the RTI wards
[Guest]: one year
[Guest]: NDTV had sponsored
[Guest]: the RTI wards
[Guest]: because I
[Guest]: was very fond of him
[Guest]: and you know
[Guest]: because I was
[Guest]: associated with NDTV
[Guest]: lot of support
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: when he wanted
[Guest]: we did this
[Guest]: big event in Delhi
[Guest]: and there were
[Guest]: camps all over
[Guest]: it was called
[Guest]: Ghoos ko Ghoosa
[Guest]: drive against bribes
[Guest]: one can search
[Guest]: for it
[Guest]: the internet
[Guest]: was not so
[Guest]: major in 2005
[Guest]: but you will
[Guest]: still find some
[Guest]: remnants of that
[Guest]: it was like
[Guest]: huge
[Guest]: logistically huge
[Guest]: there were like
[Guest]: about 60
[Guest]: organisations
[Guest]: from around the
[Guest]: country involved
[Guest]: filing RTIs
[Guest]: every day
[Guest]: now people
[Guest]: who had
[Guest]: boots on the
[Guest]: ground
[Guest]: they were like
[Guest]: we are fighting
[Guest]: with these guys
[Guest]: we are doing
[Guest]: dharnas against
[Guest]: these guys
[Guest]: why are we
[Guest]: meeting with
[Guest]: Digvijay Singh
[Guest]: he said
[Guest]: you have to
[Guest]: file RTIs
[Guest]: they have a
[Guest]: carder
[Guest]: who will
[Guest]: start doing
[Guest]: RTIs
[Guest]: whether it is
[Guest]: because Sonia
[Guest]: wants to
[Guest]: undercut
[Guest]: Manmohan
[Guest]: internal
[Guest]: politics
[Guest]: whatever
[Guest]: we have
[Guest]: nothing
[Guest]: to do with
[Guest]: it
[Guest]: you have
[Guest]: so many
[Guest]: carders
[Guest]: do RTIs
[Guest]: corruption
[Guest]: is it
[Guest]: our money
[Guest]: our rights
[Guest]: we have a
[Guest]: right to know
[Guest]: I was like
[Guest]: dude
[Guest]: seriously
[Guest]: Sudarshan
[Guest]: I am asking
[Guest]: you to join
[Guest]: the RSS
[Guest]: they have
[Guest]: carder
[Guest]: if they
[Guest]: sit and
[Guest]: file RTIs
[Guest]: on why
[Guest]: is this
[Guest]: broken
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: should use
[Guest]: the RTI
[Guest]: like they
[Guest]: should
[Guest]: do
[Guest]: RTIs
[Guest]: corruption
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: a guy
[Guest]: like me
[Guest]: would never
[Guest]: go and
[Guest]: sit
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: there is
[Guest]: another
[Guest]: thing
[Guest]: and this
[Guest]: was a
[Guest]: big difference
[Guest]: in the
[Guest]: Sangh
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: Congress
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: was even
[Guest]: when I
[Guest]: was a
[Guest]: reporter
[Guest]: with
[Guest]: News
[Guest]: I had
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: get back
[Guest]: I didn't
[Guest]: want to
[Guest]: sit in
[Guest]: his office
[Guest]: but I
[Guest]: was sitting
[Guest]: in his
[Guest]: house
[Guest]: on his
[Guest]: sofa
[Guest]: while his
[Guest]: wife was
[Guest]: talking
[Guest]: to his
[Guest]: aunt
[Guest]: it was
[Guest]: very
[Guest]: gharelu
[Guest]: type
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: I can't
[Guest]: stand
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: RSS
[Guest]: but I
[Guest]: can't
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: are
[Guest]: complicated
[Guest]: that doesn't
[Guest]: mean I
[Guest]: love Sudarshan
[Guest]: and hate
[Guest]: Sibal
[Guest]: when are
[Guest]: we talking
[Guest]: are we
[Guest]: talking
[Guest]: about
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: UPA
[Guest]: time
[Guest]: yes
[Guest]: Sibal
[Guest]: is my
[Guest]: primary
[Guest]: combatant
[Guest]: are we
[Guest]: talking
[Guest]: 2014
[Guest]: no he
[Guest]: is not
[Guest]: it is
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: RSS
[Guest]: not
[Guest]: Dharwinder
[Guest]: I know
[Amit Varma]: so I hope you are
[Amit Varma]: right and I won't
[Amit Varma]: push back on that
[Amit Varma]: but it does
[Amit Varma]: strike me that
[Amit Varma]: like when I
[Amit Varma]: think of what
[Amit Varma]: a man's
[Amit Varma]: character is
[Amit Varma]: I will think
[Amit Varma]: of his
[Amit Varma]: actions
[Amit Varma]: and you
[Amit Varma]: know when
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: incorruptible
[Amit Varma]: and I just
[Amit Varma]: look at that
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir thing
[Guest]: for example
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: so you
[Amit Varma]: know either
[Amit Varma]: he genuinely
[Amit Varma]: believed that
[Guest]: he was
[Amit Varma]: incorruptible
[Amit Varma]: I mean I
[Amit Varma]: know
[Amit Varma]: sure I mean
[Amit Varma]: look I am
[Guest]: sure even
[Guest]: Modi is
[Amit Varma]: incorruptible
[Amit Varma]: financially
[Amit Varma]: I kind of
[Amit Varma]: disagree but
[Amit Varma]: anyway
[Amit Varma]: I mean if
[Guest]: you have
[Guest]: inside
[Guest]: info feel
[Guest]: free to
[Guest]: give it here
[Unknown]: but
[Unknown]: Hitler was
[Guest]: a vegetarian
[Unknown]: Mohan was
[Guest]: incorruptible
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: I mean he
[Guest]: was a
[Guest]: primary
[Guest]: I get
[Guest]: it
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: believe
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: he was
[Guest]: an
[Guest]: incorruptible
[Amit Varma]: man
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: believe
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: he was
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: vegetarian
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: believe
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: he was
[Guest]: an
[Guest]: incorruptible
[Guest]: man
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: one way or the other, but so like my dadi used to say hum toh congressi hain, that generation
[Guest]: was like that, they took part in the freedom movement, she was from Kanyamaha Vidyalaya
[Guest]: for her Bapu, you know they had met these people, hum toh congressi hain, meanwhile
[Guest]: my side of the family that had seen the partition had come from Lahore, they were for the Sangh,
[Guest]: they are not even for the BJP, which is why Atal lost in 2004, the Sangh wasn't on his
[Guest]: team and the Sangh, today Modi may be bigger than the Sangh, which is many pieces have
[Guest]: been written about it and will it last, can they, but at least pre-Modi you could not
[Guest]: be bigger than the Sangh, because people like my grand aunt, you know from, they were extended
[Guest]: relatives from my father's side, from Punjab when they had come, I mean just one of them
[Guest]: is alive today, otherwise they were five sisters all right, I, you know we got on well, they
[Guest]: were nice, they were wonderful, they weren't bigoted like these bloody open air types,
[Guest]: I mean that I will say, but they will say we will vote for who the Sangh says, if the
[Guest]: Sangh says BJP, BJP, if the Sangh says Congress, we will vote for the Congress, but what the
[Guest]: Sangh says, so that is that generation of voters, our generation of voters should be
[Guest]: what is prudent, who can take down A, who can take down B, is he the perfect candidate,
[Guest]: maybe not, was Mayawati the perfect candidate, no, but I was sick of the Congress saying
[Guest]: that we are so cool because we are rich, sophisticated and corrupt, but she is not because she is
[Guest]: not rich, sophisticated, but she is corrupt, so I won't vote for Mayawati today, if someone
[Guest]: else, I can't argue with anyone saying that Mayawati is the best candidate, I know she
[Guest]: is not, but at that time I wish a couple of hundred thousand people had voted for her
[Guest]: and bloody she had, if you read the book Behenji by Ajay Bose, her coming to Chief Minister
[Guest]: was a bloody miracle and it fucking jolted UP like nothing has before, we needed something
[Guest]: like that, so right now if you don't like the way the country is heading, I don't see
[Guest]: anyone even close to Arvind being able to take, and also not just the Shahrukh Khan ki film,
[Guest]: Baniye ka Dewaag aur Mian Bhai ki Daring, it applies to him, he will take on anything,
[Guest]: like he doesn't, he has, I don't give a fuck, so that is the reason I think he is the best
[Amit Varma]: man, but yeah, I mean other than that, I kind of agree with you about how voters should
[Amit Varma]: not, you know, be fixed on one party and how we should be prudent, but I am also reminded
[Amit Varma]: of something, was it Hannah Arendt who said this, I forget who, but those who vote for
[Amit Varma]: the lesser evil should remember that they are still voting for evil, so you know, my
[Amit Varma]: kind of pessimism runs much deeper, I just think that, you know, like you, I will oppose
[Amit Varma]: whichever party is in power, because you know, that is kind of the nature of the beast, let's
[Amit Varma]: move on to talking about the media and I will end the show by asking about your experiences
[Amit Varma]: of Highway on a Plate, because you know, you intrigued me a lot with the little that you
[Amit Varma]: did say about it, but like when I look at the media, one of the things that I think
[Amit Varma]: is really exciting for creators of any kind today is that when I look back at the 1990s,
[Amit Varma]: creators were dependent on intermediaries, so if I was a writer, I could not reach my
[Amit Varma]: audience directly, my audience may value my work, because time is money, they are spending
[Amit Varma]: time reading or listening or whatever, but I have no way to capture that, I have to go
[Amit Varma]: to intermediaries like a Times of India or a news channel or whatever, give my work to
[Amit Varma]: those intermediaries, they collate eyeballs, they get advertising, I got a tiny, tiny chunk
[Amit Varma]: of that. I think that whole model is broken down completely, as you have also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: mentioned earlier and experienced and in fact, led the way for that. The model is broken
[Amit Varma]: down in two ways. One, I think that the way people discover content, consume content,
[Amit Varma]: filter content has changed completely. But I also think that advertising model is completely
[Amit Varma]: broken. Like John Wanamaker once famously said, half the money I spent on advertising
[Amit Varma]: is wasted, I don't know which half, I think today the percentage is like way more than
[Amit Varma]: that. All these metrics, which you know, publications used to get ads are basically just being gamed,
[Amit Varma]: it is a mugs game. And I think consumers are now more and more reaching creators directly
[Amit Varma]: and creators are able to not only build communities of their audiences, but also monetize that,
[Amit Varma]: because and especially what I feel is that the more you provide value to the consumer,
[Amit Varma]: the greater the level of engagement. So it is not just a total eyeballs that matter.
[Amit Varma]: It is a degree of engagement, like a news laundry support reader would 100% feel much
[Amit Varma]: more engaged and feel much more ownership than say Times of India reader, right? Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about your experiences of this, because you are essentially, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the first pioneer of this kind of thing where you are, where you have decided that advertising
[Amit Varma]: Jai Bharme, you know, we'll take the support of those we serve and as working out. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me, I'm very fascinated to know more about how you're thinking on this evolved and how
[Guest]: it's panned out. So I won't go on too long on this, because this, I mean, they're just
[Guest]: so many angles, I lived with this for so long and learned so much, you know, it could take
[Guest]: hours. But I will say a few basic things. One is, you have to find your, like you said,
[Guest]: your immediate tribe has to be very committed and convinced of what you're doing, because
[Guest]: they will carry your word faster than you will carry your word further. I will not get
[Guest]: into too much detail in that. But, you know, giants like Google and Facebook need to be
[Guest]: controlled and regulated. They need to be broken up. But how do you break up something
[Guest]: like Facebook and Vivek Khol and I discussed this and you really wonder how because it's
[Guest]: a network. How can you break up a network? It's not like big oil that you ran into fire
[Guest]: for. But the power they have is deeply, deeply worrying. And they can shut you and me out
[Guest]: if they choose to. Which is why regulation is an important aspect, which is why I believe
[Guest]: we live in a post ideological age. I find the whole commentary around, you know, people
[Guest]: who identify themselves as communists or socialists as idiotic as people who identify themselves
[Guest]: as capitalists, because I shouldn't use the word like idiotic, but unwise. It is not a
[Guest]: thought through position, because if you look at history, political history and economic
[Guest]: history of the world, I mean, some of the most capitalist countries, so to speak, have
[Guest]: the biggest socialist programs, whether it is, you know, the US. But the argument then
[Guest]: would be that you shouldn't call them capitalist and vice versa on the other side, which is,
[Guest]: you know, you live on. What's wrong with you? I'm blanking out. US, what do you get? You
[Guest]: get after the Great Depression, the fatigue of talking about three hours is completely
[Guest]: the big deal. What is a big new deal? The new deal, you know, the new deal and getting
[Guest]: giving everyone that basic survival unemployment that you live on. In Singapore, you know,
[Guest]: the housing that you get is like way subsidized. There's no place like Singapore where everything
[Guest]: is like market, market, capitalist, capitalist. Look at China, communist state. I just think
[Guest]: that the regulation that is required. So I believe regulation is something that is very
[Guest]: important. But what you call regulation is what is like this whole debate around news
[Guest]: media. Should you not be regulated? Of course, we should regulate. But who says we aren't
[Guest]: regulated? The way it is worded, that there is no regulation, there is a regulation. We
[Guest]: do abide by laws. We have to. There is some compliance we have to do. So what is regulation
[Guest]: is important. Now, that is a very important part in the world going forward with people
[Guest]: like Google and Facebook coming as powerful as they are. The honeymoon that you and I
[Guest]: are going through right now can really be brought to a very rude and abrupt end. I think
[Guest]: Germany is going down the right way. I think other countries also have to have think through
[Guest]: how you control these guys because they are cornering the growth of the Internet when
[Guest]: it comes to the financial aspect of the commerce of it is being cornered by four or five big
[Guest]: guys that is not healthy for any society. So let's put that aside. That is all I have
[Guest]: to say about this aspect. And it's a very important aspect of the growth. But when it
[Guest]: comes to what can you and I do, you know, identify that tribe, convince people. And
[Guest]: I've also realized that in the first stage, people don't identify with a brand or a mission.
[Guest]: They identify with the person. Do they like Amit? Do they like Madhu? Do they like Abhinandan?
[Guest]: And that's also true for politics today in the digital age, you know, which is why this
[Guest]: whole lament of, oh, it's a one man party. Oh, it's dude, if you understand politics
[Guest]: and messaging, that is how it will be, at least in the foreseeable future, at least
[Guest]: as far as the media consumption and consumer behavior of voters is right now, your party
[Guest]: will not be bigger than your leader. And no matter what noble intentions may have been
[Guest]: started by that, we are against central command. High command culture, high command culture,
[Guest]: you cannot do without that. Your party will not survive for one year. Similarly, stage
[Guest]: one has to be person. People have to like you. So you have to put out what you believe.
[Guest]: Your message is you. And then they say, OK, what this guy saying we agree with or disagree
[Guest]: with. Like a lot of people in the beginning and now have stopped getting that hate mail
[Guest]: and that hate tweets. We thought you were a good boy. Why? Because in 2012, my primary
[Guest]: attack was at Manmohan and Gang. Now it is at your boy. Now you hate me. But at that
[Guest]: time, you liked me. A chai enthusiastic, a lot I said, say Congress, a lot I take care,
[Guest]: you know, so support. Subscribers. I hear message. So no matter how many tweet key by
[Guest]: if I had to choose between two and a gun was put to my head, of course, I choose Congress
[Guest]: because I hate I hate religious bigotry. Oh, my God, he's like this. Hello. Welcome to
[Guest]: the party. Of course, anyone sensible will be, you know. Now, the next stage for growth
[Guest]: opinions will not get you scale. If I had like for you, a single podcast, if I was doing
[Guest]: a podcast, I can make a living doing a podcast. You know, I can get a few hundred, a couple
[Guest]: of thousand subscribers. That's enough to take care of my needs. But if I want to do
[Guest]: reporting, I want to make a difference in the news world. You cannot be the only star.
[Guest]: You have to, over time, take the backseat. You have to become the side. And you have
[Guest]: to have a bunch of people who are really good at what they do and are passionate as you.
[Guest]: They aren't there for the anchor. But I want to be an anchor. I want to be an anchor. This
[Guest]: lady, Narasimhan, was a Mr. Model or something. What was your pursuit? What are you doing?
[Guest]: Have you ever had an interest in this? You know, have four or five such people who are
[Guest]: as driven by the mission as you are because you cannot do it. So, you know, we have such
[Guest]: a phenomenal team, you know, our design team. You know how committed they are. They're so
[Guest]: young and they have that. There's a raid. Should we come to office? I said, kids, you
[Guest]: stay home, man. Should we come? How have they not named us? They are willing to jump into
[Guest]: the fight with you. And they're 24. I'm fucking 47 here. You know, have that team and you'll
[Guest]: go through mistakes. You'll hire five lemons who are just there for the ride. And then
[Guest]: when they realize, dude, these guys mean business, then I'm quitting. I'm joining Times. Congratulations.
[Guest]: Why would you come here if that was your intention? But most importantly, opinions will not for
[Guest]: what I'm doing. It has to be ground reports. The crux of growth is ground reports. First
[Guest]: post had more opinion piece than anybody does. They will know it's going to pay to pay first
[Guest]: post. Nobody. Your ground reporting has to be of a certain caliber. If it has to grow
[Guest]: and podcasts are very important because podcasts are very important for your primary tribe.
[Guest]: Your primary tribe likes the sound of your message of your passion. But podcasts are
[Guest]: high engagement. Absolutely. So that and we started podcasts, you know, before anybody
[Guest]: had because I was addicted to podcast from the mid 2000s. So I was just addicted to the
[Guest]: NPR podcast when that bloody Lehman broke and they started Planet Money. I was addicted
[Guest]: to that podcast and I haven't missed an episode in the last so many years. And I was like
[Guest]: podcast. And I think he started out in 2013, 14. I forget when we started a podcast. And
[Guest]: I was like, why the fuck should I start a podcast? I like do it. It is the most highest
[Guest]: engagement thing. And sure, it was. And when we put it behind the paywall, you know, that's
[Guest]: when we saw the biggest spurt in subscribers back then, when we just had three or four
[Guest]: ground reporters. Today, we have maybe 10, 11, 12 ground reporters. And we want to take
[Guest]: this number up to 50 ground reporters. We want to have the network of reporters who
[Guest]: are passionate, driven and not influenced by advertisers.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. But my one comment on that issue about, you know, a handful of these networks
[Amit Varma]: owning the Internet is that, yes, I think that's an existential threat to all of us.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm incredibly worried about it. But I also feel that we should not reflexively think
[Amit Varma]: of state coercion as the answer. If state coercion is to be the answer, then it's people
[Amit Varma]: like Modi who could be deciding or people like Trump. And so I'm just really wary of
[Amit Varma]: that. That's fine. You want to regulate the media, but who's regulating you? You know,
[Amit Varma]: any dispensation that really regulates you through the power of the state will crush
[Amit Varma]: dissent in some way or the other. That's kind of what I mean. Yeah, that's a more complicated
[Guest]: discussion that, you know, we can leave for some other day, but there's an inevitability
[Guest]: to governments. And there's an inevitability to governments framing regulatory frameworks.
[Guest]: Do you want to influence that as much as possible?
[Guest]: Yeah. Now, how you go about that is a different, but at least in the current state of how things
[Guest]: are run in the world, you can't get around that problem. And one thing that I've learned
[Guest]: from people like Arvind especially is that identify the problem that you can't change
[Guest]: and then fucking set that aside as a given. This is a given we're living with. Now, what
[Guest]: can I change to get to where I want to get? Governments framing policy for anything is
[Guest]: a given. How we get about influencing that is what we can do. Well said, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned highway on a plate and all that. I won't ask you to elaborate on it at a too
[Amit Varma]: much length, but I have a broader question that also kind of touches upon that experience,
[Amit Varma]: which is that you, you spoke that while shooting highway on a plate, you visited every state
[Amit Varma]: in this country, which is phenomenal. Now, both of us grew up in little privileged bubbles
[Amit Varma]: over time. We came out of it little bits at a time and our eyes open and you see something
[Amit Varma]: new and a layer falls off somewhere and a veil falls off somewhere else. And you see
[Amit Varma]: something in a way that you didn't see before. And in your case, one as a general thing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you look back as the young you, the 20 year old you, and you look at
[Amit Varma]: you today, what are the layers that you think fell off? In what way are you kind of different
[Amit Varma]: from that? And would this experience of having taken you to so many states for this show
[Amit Varma]: and would also the experience of so much ground reporting, you know, actually, you know, getting
[Amit Varma]: out in the field and, you know, even though a lot of ground reporting may have been back
[Amit Varma]: in the day, you know, how did this make you see the country differently? Like if there's
[Amit Varma]: a young person who, who has the same kind of background as you and I do, but they're
[Amit Varma]: young, they're 22, what do you want to tell them that, bro, the world is not how you see
[Guest]: it, but what else would you add to that? I mean, there are many things, but I mean, maybe
[Guest]: the couple of things that are most important learnings for me were that, you know, I had
[Guest]: this cockiness and arrogance that, that many people have, because, you know, I come from
[Guest]: a home that is very well read, I have read so many books, I went to a good school, I
[Guest]: passed exams fairly effortlessly, I never owned a textbook in my life. And yet I'd,
[Guest]: you know, I'd pass, I may not top, and people would say, you know, you have that cockiness.
[Guest]: The one thing that I learned through my travels with having a plate, the documentary films
[Guest]: I shot, Arvind, everybody, the people who are in the gig, know the gig best. So, which
[Guest]: is why central planning is something that I'm completely against the whole Swaraj model.
[Guest]: And I'll illustrate this by one specific example, because while I was shooting having a plate,
[Guest]: I was also flirting with activism at the time, you know, quote, unquote, again, you called
[Guest]: yourself a journalist earlier, and you've spoken about that right now. Great. So you're
[Amit Varma]: exhausting me to submission. This is the whole reason of for our podcast, you tire the person
[Guest]: out and then they speak the truth. But, you know, we were in the Northeast, I think this
[Guest]: must have been, maybe somewhere near Nagaland. I think this was in a village called Thembang,
[Guest]: if I'm not wrong. And, you know, have you traveled to Arunachal Nagaland, etc? No, sadly
[Guest]: not. It's really, I mean, now, of course, when you go into Arunachal, that you have
[Guest]: to stop to show your inner line permit, etc. Now there's lots of shops there, where I had
[Guest]: gone for the first time. It was like, you go then there's this deep green river and
[Guest]: lush forest, like Jurassic Park, you know, it's a, it's very dramatic entry. And then
[Guest]: as you go further, because they're clouds very low, now you like driving in and out
[Guest]: of clouds. It's really, I mean, the visibility can be very low. And the weather isn't that
[Guest]: great all the time. So, and you know, in the evening, when you're not shooting, you sit
[Guest]: with whether you're in a village, you go. I was like, what would you want over here
[Guest]: if you were given the funds in this local area? This is a cinema hall. Someone said
[Guest]: a hall where we can have marriages, parties, you know, dance parties, music. I was like,
[Guest]: dude, like, seriously, this is why, you know, central planning may be a good idea. What
[Guest]: do they want? A cinema hall. They want a hall for parties. And then when you stay and talk,
[Guest]: you understand why they said, because in our village, if any kid wants to watch a movie
[Guest]: or wants any entertainment, they have to go to, you know, depending on which village,
[Guest]: Kohima, Phunishalong. And you've seen the roads here. We lose whatever X amount of kids
[Guest]: every year to accidents. If they had a place here, they wouldn't drive 40 kilometers away
[Guest]: to watch a film or to go for a party or to play in a band. There should be one close
[Guest]: by. And I'm like, you know, would a central planner here saying that, you know, in the
[Guest]: Northeast, in these eight villages, what should we put? Would anyone say cinema hall? No man.
[Guest]: Would they say a bloody hall for music system and a stage where people can perform? No.
[Guest]: They say, Khamba lagao, bamboo lagao, whatever the fuck lagao. No, those guys know best.
[Guest]: And when you sit and talk to them, you get. So one learning was that. Oh, lovely story,
[Guest]: which you might like. I know your listeners would have said this on a Highway My Plate
[Guest]: podcast. There's a place near Rajasthan called Sendra. It has the best dahi bhallas in the
[Guest]: country. Now, before Pragati Padana was demolished, there used to be an annual food festival there
[Guest]: and prizes are given that most, you know, best chart. These are winning best dahi bhalla
[Guest]: for years. So we were supposed to go to Jaipur from Jaipur, you know, via Jaisalmer, ahead
[Guest]: all that. But we had to make this detour to Sendra for dahi bhallas because our research
[Guest]: showed that there's this place called Sendra. I was like, dude, we're going to take a hundred
[Guest]: kilometre detour for dahi bhallas, like one sequence. And as a producer, you're thinking,
[Guest]: is it worth the trip? So I was in any case in a very negative frame of mind. I was like,
[Guest]: how special can dahi bhalla be? So while I was sitting there, you know, waiting for the
[Guest]: shot to be set up, I was telling Rocky, bloody fucking what, two hour detour for dahi bhalla.
[Guest]: How special can dahi bhalla be? Dahi bhalla is dahi bhalla. The guy heard me. Now you're
[Guest]: cocky, arrogant, city slicker. Isko angrezi nahi aati hogi. Usko toh saare aati hi thi.
[Guest]: Although he was dressed in his, you know. He said, aapne kahi yeh scotch whisky baat
[Guest]: se boor rahe hai? Whisky toh whisky hai. Scotch wali kyu khaas hai? Aur yahan aamari wali
[Guest]: kyu achi nahi hai? Maine kahi, bataiye. He says, kyunki Scotland ki stream hai ta, uska
[Guest]: paani khaas hota hai. Unki hawa khaas hoti hai. Wo jin lakdi mein rakhta hai, wo lakdi
[Guest]: khaas hoti hai. Toh wo taste aapko yahan mili nahi sakta. Hamari jo gai hai, jisse ham
[Guest]: dood nikalenge, uska jo dahi banta hai. Is hawa mein banta hai. Jo ghaas wo khaati hai.
[Guest]: Jo ham paani use karte hai. Aap jaante hain, jab aapko Delhi aate hain, Pragati Meydan
[Guest]: dahi bhalle banane. Ham teen tanker yahan se laate hain, aapke paani se nahi banate
[Guest]: dahi bhalle ham. Agar scotch whisky khaas hoti hai, dahi bhalla khaas kyu nahi hoti
[Guest]: hai. Toh nahi hoti hai. I was like, fuck man, that makes sense. He says, aap yahan
[Guest]: se, main aapko bata doong hain hum kya kya daalte hain, kitna daalte hain. Dil mein
[Guest]: bana ke dekha doon. Nahi aapke paas hamara paani hai, nahi meri ghaas hai, nahi meri
[Guest]: ghaas hai. Aap se banega hi nahi. I said, okay, fuck you, Niku. You fucking talk too
[Amit Varma]: much. Shut the fuck up. You know. How were the dahi bhallas? Outstanding, dude. And
[Guest]: I'm not a dahi bhalla guy. And I was like, fuck, you're right, man. There is something
[Guest]: about this which is, I can't get in Delhi. And I mean, other than the film that I want
[Guest]: to make, one thing that I want to do is, with Rocky, Mayur and Prashant, I want to write
[Guest]: a book on Highway Unplayed. We have about 12,000 photographs. And Prashant and Rocky
[Guest]: aap photograph ki raas. They were fucking, I'm an impatient guy when I'm shooting. And
[Guest]: photographers are impatient. They're saying, wait, abhi aa raha hai, kadik. I said, we
[Guest]: have to make 500 kilometers today. Ek aur photograph, kadik, kadik. Fuck, they would
[Guest]: just maro my bund by bloody taking pictures. But now I see why. Because we have got pictures
[Guest]: from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to fucking Arunachal. Like, I have a big poster
[Guest]: in my house, which has about 100 pictures, this, this, this, this size. It starts off
[Guest]: on the left corner with Kashmir, ends with Kanyakumari, and there's every state in the
[Guest]: front, like from Somnath Temple to Ajmer to bloody Nagaland to Tawang Monastery to Leh.
[Guest]: That is one mission that I want, that this book has stories of, and I'm not saying this
[Guest]: in the chest-thumping that I love my India, Subhash Ghai or Akshay Kumar way, but the
[Guest]: magic that, that being out there does. Probably this will happen to any country, but our country
[Guest]: is very diverse. I think there's one cliche about India, that is that everything you say
[Guest]: about India, the opposite is also true. Yeah, exactly. We are extremely kind, we are very
[Guest]: cruel. What, what Veer Das has just said, which he's got a lot of flack for, he's making
[Guest]: a different point, but everything I say about India is the opposite, also very true. We
[Guest]: are extremely cruel and callous because of how we see lynchings happen in front of us.
[Guest]: Like, in a country which is not considered so civilized as the US, even if a guy who
[Guest]: looks like me with a beard, brown skin and all, if I'm suffering with someone, I'll be
[Guest]: like, dude, you okay? Can I help you? Like in Germany, this guy really poached my cab.
[Guest]: The guys in line said, we're really sorry, Germany is not like this. That guy is not
[Guest]: from here. And they got me a cab because I was standing in line, the line was behind
[Guest]: me and some guy just came and took the cab. Would that happen here? No. And we said, we
[Guest]: are more civilized? No. But yes, here, when, you know, I was unwell, bloody people who
[Guest]: you can't stand will come and give you blood when, and people who we don't see eye to eye
[Guest]: to, we fight so much, yeah. Politically, we are on opposite sides. Prashant is, you know,
[Guest]: Sushant's brother, Sushant sir, you see him on times often. He is as right as they come
[Guest]: and I remember we used to fight so much. When I needed blood, he was there. He says, dude,
[Guest]: I'm like 100 kilos, take two liters from me, you know. It's very complicated. And if that
[Guest]: is something that I want to do, maybe, you know, when I'm, if I live to be 60, 65, maybe
[Guest]: I'll spend five years finally putting all these pictures together and writing my travels
[Guest]: and learnings from people like this guy who used to run this small dosa shop between,
[Guest]: where do all the South Indian chefs come from? What's that? Udipi. Udipi to Mangalore, I
[Guest]: think that was a stretch. He runs a small dosa shop. He's, he didn't even have two clothes
[Guest]: to cover his body. We were a crew of 10. We must have eaten like 500 worth of dosa. We
[Guest]: said, eat, okay. And we had a policy, we'd pay, otherwise we will not review it because
[Guest]: you can't go eat for free and say that we. So we tell all the dhaba owners, restaurants,
[Guest]: and then they'd understand, you know, all the hospitality, because after Rocky Mahir
[Guest]: became big names, people would want to see us review. So we said, and people would say,
[Guest]: we won't feature you. Then they'd say, okay, fine. Take the money. This guy said, I won't
[Guest]: take money. I said, dude, you can't not take money. There are fucking 10 of us. Your hole
[Guest]: in the wall is worth less than one wheel of a car. So please, please, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: And you know, there was a language barrier because then I usually pull out my Trump card
[Guest]: and then we won't feature you on the show because that's our policy. He says, don't
[Guest]: feature me. He said, I don't want to be featured in your show. It's late at night. You've
[Guest]: come here. I enjoyed talking to you. I fed you those cells. I'm not going to take money
[Guest]: from you. If that means you don't feature me, don't feature me. You know, you fucking
[Guest]: meet magical people who have nothing and will give you everything. So, and you can't cross
[Amit Varma]: dicks also. So yeah, someday. Yeah. I mean, that cliche is one. In fact, I keep repeating
[Amit Varma]: about the opposite also being true in India. I'd done an episode with JP Narayan where
[Amit Varma]: I put to him, I mentioned what an illiberal society India had. And of course I meant things
[Amit Varma]: like how we treat women, caste, all of that. And he said at the same time, it's very liberal
[Amit Varma]: in some ways. You look at the cuisine, look at the food, which you ate. Everything in
[Amit Varma]: every meal you must have eaten has really come from all over the place. And just to
[Amit Varma]: add something to this Dahi Valla angle, one angle he probably forgot is that, for example,
[Amit Varma]: why do people eat so much tomato juice when they're flying? Because at that altitude,
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't taste but taste and tomato juice, tomato juice tastes better for that way, which
[Amit Varma]: is why they sell more of it up there than down here. So maybe there's something to that
[Amit Varma]: as well. And yeah, and I, of course, you know, as you would know, I have a deep distaste
[Amit Varma]: for central planning, but that is one way in which Modiji and Heruji are exactly the
[Amit Varma]: same, great belief in doing everything from the top down. So I'm, you know, I've really
[Amit Varma]: taken enough of your time and you've been very kind with your time and insights. I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to ask you one final question, which I can't help but ask, which I ask all my guests.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like you to recommend some books for my listeners to read, books that might have
[Amit Varma]: shaped you, changed you in some way that are dear to you, or even books where you want
[Amit Varma]: to stand on a soapbox and shout, read this book, please read this book.
[Guest]: Okay, that's a difficult one because there's so many and also what phase of life are we
[Guest]: talking about? Like, I would not recommend, you know, Guha's India After Gandhi or many
[Guest]: of his books, because I think he, because his wealth of knowledge is so immense, he
[Guest]: can tell you a story that would ordinarily take someone 100,000 words, he can tell it
[Guest]: to you in 10,000. So India After Gandhi can tell you a lot about the odds that India was
[Guest]: shaped in with, in a fairly, I mean, think about how big the country is, keeping that
[Guest]: in mind. So, you know, but I would not recommend that to someone who's in class 10, 11, 12,
[Guest]: or even first year college. Maybe you should read that if you're in your 20s or 30s. I
[Guest]: would not recommend Thomas Hardy to anyone who's maybe mid to late 20s.
[Amit Varma]: Let me give a twist to that. What would 47 year old Niku recommend to the 20 year old Niku?
[Guest]: Oh, dear God, that PG Woodhouse is going over your head. So fucking don't waste your time
[Guest]: by reading them just because your mother says they're funny.
[Amit Varma]: I love PG Woodhouse but continue.
[Guest]: Yeah, but yeah, I would recommend, you know, honestly, I read a lot for my age. So I actually
[Guest]: wouldn't. But what I will say is that books that have completely knocked my socks off
[Guest]: is M and the Big Whom by Jerry Pinto. I think, and you know, I've read some other books
[Guest]: of Jerry after that, which are not that great, but don't hold me to it. But I will hazard
[Guest]: saying that that's probably the best book by an Indian author I have ever read. His
[Guest]: mastery over the language, his craft, and not just that even Rushdie has. Rushdie is
[Guest]: very good at language and I would also recommend Shame. Highly recommend Shame. For me, it's
[Guest]: better than Midnight's Children. But he's able to communicate the most profound emotions
[Guest]: in like four words. Like how the fuck does he do that? And that story, it is so honest.
[Guest]: It is so identifiable. You can see many of your life instances there. So I'd say M and
[Guest]: the Big Whom is a must read for anyone. When I read it and when you send a wave, I read
[Guest]: it, I closed it. Next day, I bought five copies. And whoever I met in the next week, I said,
[Guest]: here, read this book, read this book, read this book. So that very few books have had
[Guest]: that effect on me. M and the Big Whom is one. I loved Shame by Rushdie. I think Thomas Hardy
[Guest]: should be read when you're in young twenties. It has an idyllic romance in it. And I think
[Guest]: when you're that age, you should be a romantic. Fuck politics. It'll come to you eventually.
[Guest]: You know, think of the romance and the beautiful things in the world. I mean, so in your early
[Guest]: twenties, you know, I would say, you know, I loved it was panned by critics. I loved
[Guest]: The Ground Beneath Her Feet by Rushdie. I even liked Shalimar the Clown a lot. I loved
[Guest]: Brightened Rock by Graham Greene. I mean, it's like a punch in the gut. You know, the
[Guest]: darkness that he creates, you get depressed. That's the thing about books. There's so
[Guest]: many dozens and hundreds of them. Like for me, The Great Gatsby was like a wonderful
[Guest]: book and it was so thin. It's the only book that I finished because also because it was
[Guest]: thin and I was on a flight and I flipped it over and started reading it again. Because
[Guest]: you know, you just, and then later so many things fall into place because then you're
[Guest]: curious about Fitzgerald. Why did he write it? What was this Gilded Age all about? What
[Guest]: was he commenting on? But today to people you're in my age whose eyes are getting weaker,
[Guest]: I recommend podcasts because they are a fantastic way to learn. And Real Dictators is one that
[Guest]: I highly recommend. It is just phenomenal. And also before I finish, I must plug News
[Guest]: Laundry and I will say all for Amit's listeners, mail me at abhinandansekri at gmail.com. I
[Guest]: repeat, abhinandansekri at gmail.com and we'll get you 25% off and we'll also send you a
[Guest]: gift hamper from News Laundry. If you're in India, I can't ship it overseas, but if you
[Guest]: give me an Indian address, I'll ship it. So you can mail me and we'll give you a 25%
[Guest]: discount, but just you have to say that you came through Amit's show cause otherwise I'll
[Amit Varma]: get other mails also. So yeah. Yeah. So kindly do that. And even if you don't want the 25%
[Amit Varma]: discount, even if you're abroad, if you've reached this far in the show, it's because
[Amit Varma]: you care because you're engaged. So please do subscribe to News Laundry. It's, it's,
[Amit Varma]: I love the work you guys do. And thank you so much for, you know, coming here, being
[Guest]: so patient, sharing your insights. No, my pleasure. Thank you for inviting me. And it
[Guest]: was wonderful having you at the Media Rumble a couple of years back. Hopefully when you
[Guest]: get physical again, you'll come and we have a lot more exciting guests and a lot more
[Guest]: podcasts. So thank you for your show and, and reinventing the slow, long form, which
[Amit Varma]: people had abandoned. I'm so glad that you're doing this. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in. Thank you for listening.